---
tags:
  - budget_constraints
  - consumption_plan
  - one_period_framework
  - state_price_deflator
  - time_additive_utility
aliases:
  - Consumption Framework
  - One-Period Model
key_concepts:
  - Budget constraints
  - Initial wealth
  - Optimal consumption plan
  - State-dependent consumption
  - State-price deflator
  - Time 0 and 1
  - Time-additive utility
---

# 6.2 The one-period framework  

In the one-period framework the individual consumes at time 0 (the beginning of the period) and at time 1 (the end of the period). We denote time 0 consumption by $c_{0}$ and the state-dependent. time 1 consumption by the random variable $c$ . The individual has some initial wealth $e_{0}\geq0$ at time 0 and may receive a non-negative state-dependent endowment (income) at time 1 represented by the random variable. $e$ . The individual picks a portfolio $\pmb{\theta}$ at time 0 with a time 0 price of $\begin{array}{r}{P^{\theta}=\theta^{\top}P=\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}P_{i}}\end{array}$ , assuming the Law of One Price, and a time 1 random dividend of $\begin{array}{r}{D^{\theta}=\theta^{\top}D=\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}D_{i}}\end{array}$ . The budget constraints are therefore  

$$
\begin{array}{r c l}{{}}&{{}}&{{c_{\omega}\leq e_{\omega}+D_{\omega}^{\theta}=e_{\omega}+\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{I}D_{i\omega}\theta_{i},~\mathrm{for~all}~\omega\in\Omega,}}\ {{}}&{{}}&{{}}\ {{\displaystyle c_{0}\leq e_{0}-P^{\theta}=e_{0}-\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}P_{i}.}}\end{array}
$$  

The individual can choose the consumption plan and the portfolio. Since we will always assume that individuals prefer more consumption to less, it is clear that the budget constraints will hold as equalities. Therefore we can think of the individual choosing only the portfolio and then the consumption plan follows from the budget constraints above.  

Consumption has to be non-negative both at time 0 and in all states at time 1 so we should add such constraints when looking for the optimal strategy. However, we assume throughout that the individual has infinite marginal utility at zero consumption so that the non-negativity constraints are automatically satisfied and can be ignored. We assume that the preferences are concave so that first-order conditions provide the optimal choice. When solving the problem we will also assume that the individual acts as a price taker so that prices are unaffected by her portfolio choice. We assume that prices admit no arbitrage. If there was an arbitrage, it would be possible to obtain infinite consumption. We do not impose any constraints on the portfolios the individual may choose among.  

The following subsections characterize the optimal consumption plan for various preference specifications.  

# 6.2.1 Time-additive expected utility  

With time-additive expected utility there is a "single-date' utility function $u:\mathbb{R}_{+}\to\mathbb{R}$ such that the objective of the individual is.  

$$
\operatorname*{max}_{\theta}u(c_{0})+\mathrm{E}\left[e^{-\delta}u(c)\right],
$$  

where $\delta$ is a subjective time preference rate. Substituting in the budget constraints, we get  

$$
\operatorname*{max}_{\theta}u\left(e_{0}-\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}P_{i}\right)+\operatorname{E}\left[e^{-\delta}u\left(e+\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}D_{i}\right)\right].
$$  

The first-order condition with respect to $\theta_{i}$ is  

$$
-P_{i}u^{\prime}\left(e_{0}-\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}P_{i}\right)+\operatorname{E}\left[e^{-\delta}D_{i}u^{\prime}\left(e+\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}D_{i}\right)\right]=0
$$  

or  

$$
P_{i}u^{\prime}(c_{0})=\mathrm{E}\left[e^{-\delta}D_{i}u^{\prime}(c)\right],
$$  

where $c_{0}$ and $c$ denotes the optimal consumption plan, i.e. the consumption plan generated by the optimal portfolio $\pmb{\theta}$ . We can rewrite the above equation as.  

$$
P_{i}=\mathrm{E}\left[e^{-\delta}\frac{u^{\prime}(c)}{u^{\prime}(c_{0})}D_{i}\right].
$$  

This equation links prices to the optimal consumption plan of an individual investor.  

Comparing (6.5) and the pricing condition in the definition of a state-price deflator it is clear that  

$$
\zeta=e^{-\delta}\frac{u^{\prime}(c)}{u^{\prime}(c_{0})}
$$  

defines a state-price deflator. It is positive since marginal utilities are positive. This state-price deflator is the marginal rate of substitution of the individual capturing the willingness of the individual to substitute a bit of time 0 consumption for some time 1 consumption.  

The optimality condition (6.5) can also be justified by a variational argument, which goes as follows. Assume that $(c_{0},c)$ denotes the optimal consumption plan for the individual. Then any deviation from this plan will give the individual a lower utility. One deviation is obtained by investing in $\varepsilon>0$ additional units of asset $i$ at the beginning of the period. This leaves an initial consumption of $c_{0}-\varepsilon P_{i}$ . On the other hand, the end-of-period consumption in state $\omega$ becomes $c_{\omega}+\varepsilon D_{i\omega}$ . We know that  

$$
u(c_{0}-\varepsilon P_{i})+e^{-\delta}\operatorname{E}\left[u(c+\varepsilon D_{i})\right]\leq u(c_{0})+e^{-\delta}\operatorname{E}\left[u(c)\right].
$$  

Subtracting the right-hand side from the left-hand side and dividing by $\varepsilon$ yields  

$$
\frac{u(c_{0}-\varepsilon P_{i})-u(c_{0})}{\varepsilon}+e^{-\delta}\operatorname{E}\left[\frac{u(c+\varepsilon D_{i})-u(c)}{\varepsilon}\right]\leq0.
$$  

Letting $\varepsilon$ go to zero, the fractions on the left-hand side approaches derivatives $^{1}$ and we obtain  

$$
-P_{i}u^{\prime}(c_{0})+e^{-\delta}\operatorname{E}\left[u^{\prime}(c)D_{i}\right]\leq0,
$$  

which implies that  

$$
P_{i}\geq\mathrm{E}\left[e^{-\delta}\frac{u^{\prime}(c)}{u^{\prime}(c_{0})}D_{i}\right].
$$  

On the other hand, if we consider selling $\varepsilon>0$ units of asset $i$ at the beginning of the period, the same reasoning can be used to show that  

$$
P_{i}\leq\mathrm{E}\left[e^{-\delta}\frac{u^{\prime}(c)}{u^{\prime}(c_{0})}D_{i}\right].
$$  

Hence, the relation must hold as an equality, just as in (6.5).  

Example 6.1 For the case of CRRA utility, $\begin{array}{r}{u(c)=\frac{1}{1-\gamma}c^{1-\gamma}}\end{array}$ , we have $u^{\prime}(c)=c^{-\gamma}$ . Therefore the optimal consumption plan satisfies  

$$
P_{i}=\mathrm{E}\left[e^{-\delta}\left(\frac{c}{c_{0}}\right)^{-\gamma}D_{i}\right],
$$  

and the state-price deflator derived from the individual's problem is  

$$
\zeta=e^{-\delta}\left(\frac{c}{c_{0}}\right)^{-\gamma}.
$$  

# 6.2.2 Non-additive expected utility  

Next consider non-additive expected utility where the objective is to maximize $\mathrm{E}[U(c_{0},c)]$ for some $U:\mathbb{R}_{+}\times\mathbb{R}_{+}\to\mathbb{R}$ . Again, substituting in the budget constraint, the problem is  

$$
\operatorname*{max}_{\theta}\left[U\left(e_{0}-\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}P_{i},e+\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}D_{i}\right)\right].
$$  

The first-order condition with respect to $\theta_{i}$ is  

$$
-P_{i}\operatorname{E}\left[{\frac{\partial U}{\partial c_{0}}}\left(e_{0}-\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}P_{i},e+\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}D_{i}\right)\right]+\operatorname{E}\left[D_{i}{\frac{\partial U}{\partial c}}\left(e_{0}-\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}P_{i},e+\sum_{i=1}^{I}\theta_{i}D_{i}\right)\right]=0
$$  

which implies that  

$$
P_{i}=\mathrm{E}\left[\frac{\frac{\partial U}{\partial c}(c_{0},c)}{\mathrm{E}\left[\frac{\partial U}{\partial c_{0}}(c_{0},c)\right]}D_{i}\right],
$$  

so that the corresponding state-price deflator is  

$$
\zeta=\frac{\frac{\partial U}{\partial c}(c_{0},c)}{\mathrm{E}\left[\frac{\partial U}{\partial c_{0}}(c_{0},c)\right]}.
$$  

This could be supported by a variational argument as in the case of time-additive expected utility.   
Again note that these equations hold for the optimal consumption plan..  

Example 6.2 Consider the very simple habit-style utility function  

$$
U(c_{0},c)=\frac{1}{1-\gamma}c_{0}^{1-\gamma}+\frac{1}{1-\gamma}e^{-\delta}\left(c-\alpha c_{0}\right)^{1-\gamma}.
$$  

The subsistence level for time. $^{1}$ consumption is some fraction $\alpha$ of time $0$ consumption. In this. case the relevant marginal utilities are  

$$
\begin{array}{l}{\displaystyle\frac{\partial U}{\partial c_{0}}(c_{0},c)=c_{0}^{-\gamma}-\beta e^{-\delta}(c-\beta c_{0})^{-\gamma},}\ {\displaystyle\frac{\partial U}{\partial c}(c_{0},c)=e^{-\delta}(c-\beta c_{0})^{-\gamma}.}\end{array}
$$  

The first-order condition therefore implies that  

$$
P_{i}=\mathrm{E}\left[\frac{e^{-\delta}\left(c-\beta c_{0}\right)^{-\gamma}}{\mathrm{E}\left[c_{0}^{-\gamma}-\beta e^{-\delta}\left(c-\beta c_{0}\right)^{-\gamma}\right]}D_{i}\right],
$$  

and the associated state-price deflator is  

$$
\zeta=\frac{e^{-\delta}\left(c-\beta c_{0}\right)^{-\gamma}}{\mathrm{E}\left[c_{0}^{-\gamma}-\beta e^{-\delta}\left(c-\beta c_{0}\right)^{-\gamma}\right]}.
$$  

This simple example indicates that (internal) habit formation leads to pricing expressions that are considerably more complicated than time-additive utility..  

# 6.2.3 A general utility index  

A general utility index $\mathrm{\mathcal{U}}$ is tractable for a finite state space where we can write the objective as  

$$
\operatorname*{max}_{\theta}\mathcal{U}\big(c_{0},c_{1},\ldots,c_{S}\big),
$$  

where $c_{\omega}$ is consumption in state $\omega$ $\omega=1,\ldots,S$ . From the budget constraint $\begin{array}{r}{c_{\omega}=e_{\omega}+\sum_{i=1}^{I}D_{i\omega}\theta_{i}}\end{array}$ so the first-order condition implies that  

$$
P_{i}=\sum_{\omega=1}^{S}{\frac{{\frac{\partial\mathcal{U}}{\partial c_{\omega}}}{\big(}c_{0},c_{1},\ldots,c_{S}{\big)}}{{\frac{\partial\mathcal{U}}{\partial c_{0}}}{\big(}c_{0},c_{1},\ldots,c_{S}{\big)}}}D_{i\omega}.
$$  

This defines a state-price vector $\psi$ by  

$$
\psi_{\omega}=\frac{\frac{\partial\mathcal{U}}{\partial c_{\omega}}(c_{0},c_{1},\dots,c_{S})}{\frac{\partial\mathcal{U}}{\partial c_{0}}(c_{0},c_{1},\dots,c_{S})}.
$$  

# 6.2.4 A two-step procedure in a complete market  

In a complete market we can separate the consumption and the portfolio decision as follows:  

1. find the optimal consumption plan given the budget constraints,.   
2. find the portfolio financing the optimal consumption plan; such a portfolio will exist when the market is complete.  

Let us show this in the case of a finite state space. Suppose the market is complete and let $\psi$ denote the unique state-price vector. The individual can obtain any dividend vector $_{D}$ at the cost of $\psi\cdot D$ . Hence the individual can first solve the problem.  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{\displaystyle\operatorname*{max}_{c_{0},c,D}\mathcal{U}(c_{0},c)}\ &{\mathrm{~s.t.~}c\leq e+D,}\ &{\quad\quad\quad c_{0}\leq e_{0}-\psi\cdot D,}\ &{\quad\quad c_{0},c\geq0,}\end{array}
$$  

for the optimal consumption plan. Here (6.16) is a vector inequality, which means that the inequality should hold element by element, i.e.  

$$
c_{\omega}\leq e_{\omega}+D_{\omega},\quad\omega=1,\ldots,S.
$$  

In fact we can eliminate the dividends from the problem. Multiplying (6.16) by $\psi$ , we get  

$$
\psi\cdot c\leq\psi\cdot e+\psi\cdot D.
$$  

Adding this to (6.17), we see that any feasible consumption plan $(c_{0},c)$ must satisfy  

$$
c_{0}+\psi\cdot c\leq e_{0}+\psi\cdot e.
$$  

This is natural, since the left-hand side is the present value of the consumption plan and the right-. hand side is the present value of the endowment, which is well-defined since market completeness  

ensures that some portfolio will provide a dividend identical to the endowment. Conversely, suppose a consumption plan $(c_{0},c)$ satisfies (6.18). Then it will also satisfy the conditions (6.16) and (6.17) with $D=c-e$ . Thus we can find the utility maximizing consumption plan by solving  

$$
\operatorname*{max}_{c_{0},c}\mathcal{U}(c_{0},c)
$$  

$$
c_{0},c\ge0,
$$  

and we will still assume that the non-negativity constraint will be automatically satisfied. The Lagrangian for the problem is therefore  

$$
\mathcal{L}=\mathcal{U}(c_{0},\pmb{c})+\nu\left(e_{0}+\pmb{\psi}\cdot\pmb{e}-c_{0}-\pmb{\psi}\cdot\pmb{c}\right),
$$  

where $\nu$ is the Lagrange multiplier. The first-order conditions are  

$$
{\frac{\partial\mathcal{U}}{\partial c_{0}}}(c_{0},c)=\nu,\quad{\frac{\partial\mathcal{U}}{\partial c}}(c_{0},c)=\nu\psi.
$$  

In particular, the optimal consumption plan satisfies  

$$
{\frac{{\frac{\partial{\mathcal{U}}}{\partial c}}\big(c_{0},c\big)}{{\frac{\partial{\mathcal{U}}}{\partial c_{0}}}\big(c_{0},c\big)}}=\psi.
$$  

Given the chosen consumption plan. $\mathbf{c}$ and the future income. $\textbf{\em e}$ , we can back out the portfolio by.   
solving $\underline{{\underline{{D}}}}^{\top}\pmb{\theta}=\pmb{e}-\pmb{c}$ for $\pmb{\theta}$ . In a complete market, such a portfolio can always be found.  

With an infinite state space and an expected utility representation $\mathcal{U}(c_{0},c)=\mathrm{E}[U(c_{0},c)]$ , we can formulate the complete markets problem as  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{\underset{c_{0},c}{\operatorname*{max}}~\mathrm{E}[U(c_{0},c)]}\ &{\mathrm{~s.t.~}c_{0}+\mathrm{E}[\zeta c]\leq e_{0}+\mathrm{E}[\zeta e]}\ &{\mathrm{~}c_{0},c\geq0,}\end{array}
$$  

where $\zeta$ is the unique state-price deflator. The Lagrangian is  

$$
{\mathcal{L}}=\operatorname{E}[U(c_{0},c)]+\nu\left(e_{0}-c_{0}+\operatorname{E}[\zeta(e-c)]\right)=\nu\left(e_{0}-c_{0}\right)+\operatorname{E}\left[U(c_{0},c)+\nu\zeta(e-c)\right].
$$  

We maximize the expectation $\operatorname{E}\left[U(c_{0},c)+\nu\zeta(e-c)\right]$ by maximizing state-by-state, i.e. maximizing $U(c_{0},c(\omega))+\nu\zeta(\omega)\left(e(\omega)-c(\omega)\right)$ for each state $\omega$ . The first-order conditions with respect to $c(\omega)$ implies  

$$
{\frac{\partial U}{\partial c}}(c_{0},c(\omega))=\nu\zeta(\omega)
$$  

and the first-order condition with respect to $c_{0}$ implies that  

$$
\operatorname{E}\left[{\frac{\partial U}{\partial c_{0}}}(c_{0},c)\right]=\nu
$$  

and, hence,  

$$
\frac{\frac{\partial U}{\partial c}(c_{0},c)}{\mathrm{E}\left[\frac{\partial U}{\partial c_{0}}(c_{0},c)\right]}=\zeta.
$$  

In particular, with time-additive expected utility $U(c_{0},c)=u(c_{0})+e^{-\delta}u(c)$ , we get  

$$
e^{-\delta}\frac{u^{\prime}(c)}{u^{\prime}(c_{0})}=\zeta
$$  

as found earlier.  

If the market is incomplete, the individual cannot implement any consumption plan but only those that can be financed by portfolios of traded assets. Therefore, we cannot apply the above technique.  

# 6.2.5 Optimal portfolios and mean-variance analysis  

We have not explicitly solved for the optimal portfolio. Although it is certainly relevant to study the portfolio decisions of individuals in more detail, it is not necessary for asset pricing purposes. The most popular one-period model for portfolio choice is the mean-variance model introduced by Markowitz (1952, 1959). If the individual has mean-variance preferences, cf. Section 5.6, her optimal portfolio will be a mean-variance efficient portfolio corresponding to a point on the upward-sloping branch of the mean-variance frontier. Mean-variance analysis does not by itself say anything about exactly which portfolio a given individual should choose but if we assume a given mean-variance utility function, the optimal portfolio can be derived. Note, however, that the conditions justifying mean-variance portfolio choice are highly unrealistic: either returns must be normally distributed or individuals must have mean-variance preferences. Nevertheless, the mean-variance frontier remains an important concept in both portfolio choice and asset pricing. (recall Theorem 4.6). Below we will use the traditional Lagrangian approach to characterize the mean-variance efficient portfolios. In Section 9.4 we will offer an alternative "orthogonal"' characterization and use that to show the link between mean-variance returns, pricing factors, and state-price deflators.  

We assume as before that $I$ assets are traded and let $\pmb{R}=(R_{1},\dots,R_{I})^{*}$ denote the vector of gross returns on these assets. Let ${\pmb\mu}=\operatorname{E}[{\pmb R}]$ denote the vector of expected gross returns and let. $\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}=\mathrm{Var}[{\cal R}]$ denote the $I\times I$ variance-covariance matrix of gross returns. In the characterization of mean-variance efficient portfolios, we are only interested in their returns so we can represent portfolios by portfolio weight vectors, i.e. vectors. $\pi=\left(\pi_{1},\ldots,\pi_{I}\right)^{\top}$ with ${\pmb\pi}\cdot{\bf1}=1$ , where $\pi_{i}$ is the fraction of total portfolio value invested in asset $i$ . The gross return on a portfolio. $\pi$ is $\begin{array}{r}{R^{\pi}=\pi\cdot R=\sum_{i=1}^{I}\pi_{i}R_{i}}\end{array}$ , cf. (3.7). The expectation and the variance of the return on a portfolio $\pi$ are  

$$
\begin{array}{l}{\displaystyle\mathrm{E}\left[R^{\pi}\right]=\mathrm{E}\left[\sum_{i=1}^{I}\pi_{i}R_{i}\right]=\sum_{i=1}^{I}\pi_{i}\mathrm{E}[R_{i}]=\sum_{i=1}^{I}\pi_{i}\mu_{i}=\pi\cdot\boldsymbol{\mu}=\pi^{\top}\boldsymbol{\mu},}\ {\displaystyle\mathrm{Var}\left[R^{\pi}\right]=\mathrm{Var}\left[\sum_{i=1}^{I}\pi_{i}R_{i}\right]=\sum_{i=1}^{I}\sum_{j=1}^{I}\pi_{i}\pi_{j}\mathrm{Cov}[R_{i},R_{j}]=\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\boldsymbol{\pi}.}\end{array}
$$  

A portfolio $\pi$ is then mean-variance efficient if there is an $m\in\mathbb{R}$ so that $\pi$ solves  

$$
\operatorname*{min}_{\boldsymbol{\pi}}\boldsymbol{\pi}^{\top}\underline{{\boldsymbol{\Sigma}}}\boldsymbol{\pi}\quad\mathrm{s.t.}\quad\boldsymbol{\pi}^{\top}\boldsymbol{\mu}=m,\quad\boldsymbol{\pi}^{\top}{\bf1}=1,
$$  

i.e. $\pi$ has the lowest return variance among all portfolios with expected return $m$  

# Risky assets only  

Assume that $\stackrel{\sum}{=}$ is positive definite, i.e. that. $\pi^{+}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi>0$ for all $\pi$ , which means that the variance. of the return on any portfolio is positive. Any portfolio of risky assets will be risky; there is no risk-free asset and no redundant assets. It follows that $\geqq$ is non-singular and that the inverse. $\sum_{=}{}^{-1}$ is also positive definite. We will allow for a risk-free asset later.  

The Lagrangian associated with the constrained minimization problem (6.21) is  

$$
\mathcal{L}=\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pmb{\pi}+\alpha\left(m-\pi^{\top}\pmb{\mu}\right)+\beta\left(1-\pi^{\top}\mathbf{1}\right),
$$  

where $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are Lagrange multipliers. The first-order condition with respect to $\pi$ is  

$$
\frac{\partial\mathcal{L}}{\partial\pmb{\pi}}=2\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}\pmb{\pi}-\alpha\pmb{\mu}-\beta\mathbf{1}=0,
$$  

which implies that  

$$
\pmb{\pi}=\frac{1}{2}\alpha\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}^{-1}\pmb{\mu}+\frac{1}{2}\beta\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}^{-1}\mathbf{1}.
$$  

The first-order conditions with respect to the multipliers simply give the two constraints to the minimization problem. Substituting the expression (6.22) for $\pi$ into the two constraints, we obtain the equations  

$$
\begin{array}{c}{{\alpha{\pmb\mu}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}{\pmb\mu}+\beta{\bf1}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}{\pmb\mu}=2m,}}\ {{\alpha{\pmb\mu}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}{\bf1}+\beta{\bf1}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}{\bf1}=2.}}\end{array}
$$  

Defining the numbers $A,B,C,D$ by  

$$
A=\mu^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\mu,\qquadB=\mu^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\mathbf{1}=\mathbf{1}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\mu,\qquadC=\mathbf{1}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\mathbf{1},\qquadD=A C-B^{2},
$$  

we can write the solution to the two equations in $\alpha$ and $\beta$ as  

$$
\alpha=2\frac{C m-B}{D},\qquad\beta=2\frac{A-B m}{D}.
$$  

Substituting this into (6.22) we obtain  

$$
\pmb{\pi}=\pmb{\pi}(m)\equiv\frac{C m-B}{D}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\pmb{\mu}+\frac{A-B m}{D}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\mathbf{1}.
$$  

This is the mean-variance efficient portfolio with expected gross return. $m$ . Some tedious calculations show that the variance of the return on this portfolio is equal to  

$$
\sigma^{2}(m)\equiv\pi(m)^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\underline{{\pi}}(m)=\frac{C m^{2}-2B m+A}{D}.
$$  

This is to be verified in Exercise 6.4. Equation (6.24) shows that the combinations of variance and mean form a parabola in a (mean, variance)-diagram..  

Traditionally the portfolios are depicted in a (standard deviation, mean)-diagram. The above relation can also be written as  

$$
\frac{\sigma^{2}(m)}{1/C}-\frac{(m-B/C)^{2}}{D/C^{2}}=1,
$$  

from which it follows that the optimal combinations of standard deviation and mean form a hyperbola in the (standard deviation, mean)-diagram. This hyperbola is called the mean-variance  

frontier of risky assets. The mean-variance efficient portfolios are sometimes called frontier portfolios.  

Before we proceed let us clarify a point in the derivation above. We need to divide by $D$ so $D$ has to be non-zero. In fact,. $D>0$ . To see this, first note that since. $\stackrel{\sum}{=}$ and therefore $\sum_{=}{}^{-1}$ are positive definite, we have $A>0$ and $C>0$ . Moreover,  

$$
A D=A(A C-B^{2})=(B\pmb{\mu}-A\mathbf{1})^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}(B\pmb{\mu}-A\mathbf{1})>0,
$$  

again using that $\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}^{-1}$ is positive definite. Since $A>0$ , we must have $D>0$  

The (global) minimum-variance portfolio is the portfolio that has the minimum variance among all portfolios. We can find this directly by solving the constrained minimization problem  

$$
\operatorname*{min}_{\pi}\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi\quad\mathrm{~s.t.~}\quad\pi^{\top}{\bf1}=1
$$  

where there is no constraint on the expected portfolio return. Alternatively, we can minimize the variance $\sigma^{2}(m)$ in (6.24) over all $m$ .Taking the latter route, we find that the minimum variance is obtained when the mean return is. $m_{\mathrm{min}}=B/C$ and the minimum variance is given by. $\sigma_{\mathrm{min}}^{2}=\sigma^{2}(m_{\mathrm{min}})=1/C$ . From (6.23) we get that the minimum-variance portfolio is  

$$
\pmb{\pi}_{\mathrm{min}}=\frac{1}{C}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\mathbf{1}=\frac{1}{\mathbf{1}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\mathbf{1}}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\mathbf{1}.
$$  

It will be useful to consider the problem  

$$
\operatorname*{max}_{\boldsymbol{\pi}}\frac{\boldsymbol{\pi}^{\top}\pmb{\mu}-\alpha}{\left(\boldsymbol{\pi}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pmb{\pi}\right)^{1/2}}\quad\mathrm{~s.t.~}\quad\boldsymbol{\pi}^{\top}\mathbf{1}=1,
$$  

where $\alpha$ is some constant. The denominator in the objective is clearly the standard deviation of the return of the portfolio, while the numerator is the expected return in excess of $\alpha$ . This ratio is the slope of a straight line in the (standard deviation, mean)-diagram that goes through the point $((\pi^{\top}\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}\pi)^{1/2},\pi^{\top}\mu)$ corresponding to the portfolio $\pi$ and intersects the mean-axis at $\alpha$ . Applying the constraint, the objective function can be rewritten as  

$$
f(\pi)=\frac{\pi^{\top}(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1})}{\left(\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi\right)^{1/2}}=\pi^{\top}(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1})\left(\pmb{\pi}^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi\right)^{-1/2}.
$$  

The derivative is  

$$
\frac{\partial f}{\partial\pi}=\left(\mu-\alpha\mathbf{1}\right)\left(\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi\right)^{-1/2}-\left(\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi\right)^{-3/2}\pi^{\top}(\mu-\alpha\mathbf{1})\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi
$$  

and $\begin{array}{r}{{\frac{\partial f}{\partial\pi}}={\bf0}}\end{array}$ implies that  

$$
\frac{\pi^{\top}(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1})}{\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi}\pmb{\pi}=\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\left(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1}\right),
$$  

which we want to solve for $\pi$ . Note that the equation has a vector on each side. If two vectors are identical, they will also be identical after a division by the sum of the elements of the vector. The sum of the elements of the vector on the left-hand side of (6.28) is  

$$
\mathbf{1}^{\top}\left(\frac{\pi^{\top}(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1})}{\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi}\pi\right)=\frac{\pi^{\top}(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1})}{\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi}\mathbf{1}^{\top}\pi=\frac{\pi^{\top}(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1})}{\pi^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}\pi},
$$  

where the last equality is due to the constraint. The sum of the elements of the vector on the right-hand side of (6.28) is simply $\mathbf{1}^{\top}\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}^{-1}\left(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1}\right)$ . Dividing each side of (6.28) with the sum of the elements we obtain the portfolio  

$$
\pi=\frac{\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}^{-1}\left(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1}\right)}{\mathbf{1}^{\top}\underline{{\underline{{\Sigma}}}}^{-1}\left(\pmb{\mu}-\alpha\mathbf{1}\right)}.
$$  

In particular, by letting. $\alpha=0$ , we can see that the portfolio  

$$
\pi_{\mathrm{slope}}=\frac{1}{1^{\top}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\underline{{\mu}}^{\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}}}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\underline{{\mu}}=\frac{1}{B}\underline{{\Sigma}}^{-1}\underline{{\mu}}
$$  

is the portfolio that maximizes the slope of a straight line between the origin and a point on the mean-variance frontier in the (standard deviation, mean)-diagram. Let us call. $\pi_{\mathrm{slope}}$ the maximum-slope portfolio. This portfolio has mean. $A/B$ and variance $A/B^{2}$  

From (6.23) we see that any mean-variance efficient portfolio can be written as a linear combination of the maximum-slope portfolio and the minimum-variance portfolio:.  

$$
\pi({m})=\frac{(C{m}-B)B}{D}\pi_{\mathrm{slope}}+\frac{(A-B{m})C}{D}\pi_{\mathrm{min}}.
$$  

Note that the two multipliers of the portfolios sum to one. This is a two-fund separation result. Any mean-variance efficient portfolio is a combination of two special portfolios or funds, namely the maximum slope portfolio and the minimum-variance portfolio. These two portfolios are said to generate the mean-variance frontier of risky assets. In fact, it can be shown that any other two frontier portfolios generate the entire frontier.  

The following result is both interesting and useful. Let. $R^{\pi}$ denote the return on any mean-. variance efficient portfolio different from the minimum-variance portfolio. Then there exists a unique mean-variance efficient portfolio with a return. $R^{z(\pmb{\pi})}$ such that $\mathrm{Cov}[R^{\pi},R^{z(\pmb{\pi})}]=0$ . The return $R^{z(\pmb{\pi})}$ is called the zero-beta return for. $R^{\pi}$ , which is consistent with the definition of betas in the section on pricing factors. Furthermore, one can show that.  

$$
\operatorname{E}[R^{z(\pi)}]={\frac{A-B\operatorname{E}[R^{\pi}]}{B-C\operatorname{E}[R^{\pi}]}}
$$  

and that the tangent to the mean-variance frontier at the point corresponding to $R^{\pi}$ will intersect the expected return axis exactly in $\operatorname{E}[R^{z(\pi)}]$ . These results are to be shown in Exercise 6.5.  

# Allowing for a risk-free asset  

Now let us allow for a risk-free asset with a gross return of. $R^{f}$ . The risk-free asset corresponds to the point. $(0,R^{f})$ in the (standard deviation, mean)-diagram. Either the risk-free asset is one. of the. $I$ basic assets or it can be constructed as a portfolio of the basic assets. Without loss of. generality we can assume that the risk-free asset is the. $I^{;}$ th basic asset. The remaining $M\equiv I-1$ basic assets are risky. Let $\tilde{\pmb{R}}=\left(R_{1},\ldots,R_{M}\right)^{\top}$ denote the gross return vector of the risky assets with expectation $\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}=\mathrm{E}[\tilde{\pmb{R}}]$ and variance $\tilde{\underline{{\Sigma}}}=\mathrm{Var}[\tilde{\cal R}]$ . Now assume that $\tilde{\underline{{\boldsymbol{\Sigma}}}}$ is positive definite. We assume that the risk-free return is smaller than the expected return on the minimum-variance portfolio of the risky assets.  

A portfolio of all. $I$ assets can be represented by an. $M$ -dimensional vector $\tilde{\pi}$ of the portfolio weights invested in the risky assets, while the remaining fraction $\pi_{f}\equiv1-\tilde{\pi}^{\top}{\bf1}$ is the invested in.  

the risk-free asset. A portfolio involving only the risky assets is an $M$ -dimensional vector $\tilde{\pi}$ with $\tilde{\pmb{\pi}}^{\top}{\bf1}=1$  

Fix for a moment a portfolio $\tilde{\pi}$ of risky assets only. The gross return on this portfolio is $R^{\tilde{\pi}}=\tilde{\pi}^{\top}\tilde{R}$ . Suppose you invest a fraction $\pi_{f}$ of some amount in the risk-free asset and the remaining fraction $1-\pi_{f}$ in this particular risky portfolio. The gross return on this combination will be  

$$
R=\pi_{f}R^{f}+\left(1-\pi_{f}\right)R^{\tilde{\pi}}
$$  

with mean and variance given by  

$$
\operatorname{E}[R]=\pi_{f}R^{f}+(1-\pi_{f})\operatorname{E}\left[R^{\tilde{\pi}}\right],\qquad\operatorname{Var}[R]=\left(1-\pi_{f}\right)^{2}\operatorname{Var}\left[R^{\tilde{\pi}}\right]
$$  

If $\pi_{f}\leq1$ , the standard deviation of the return is $\sigma[R]=(1-\pi_{f})\sigma\left[R^{\dagger}\right]$ and we obtain.  

$$
\operatorname{E}[R]=\pi_{f}R^{f}+{\frac{\operatorname{E}\left[R^{\tilde{\pi}}\right]}{\sigma\left[R^{\tilde{\pi}}\right]}}\sigma[R]
$$  

so varying $\pi_{f}$ the set of points $\{(\sigma[R],\operatorname{E}[R])\mid\pi_{f}\leq1\}$ will form an upward-sloping straight line from $(0,R^{f})$ through $(\sigma\left[R^{\tilde{\pi}}\right],\mathrm{E}\left[R^{\tilde{\pi}}\right])$ .For $\pi_{f}~>~1$ , the standard deviation of the combined portfolio is $\sigma[R]=-(1-\pi_{f})\sigma\left[R^{\tilde{\pi}}\right]$ and we get  

$$
\operatorname{E}[R]=\pi_{f}R^{f}-{\frac{\operatorname{E}\left[R^{{\tilde{\pi}}}\right]}{\sigma\left[R^{{\tilde{\pi}}}\right]}}\sigma[R],
$$  

which defines a downward-sloping straight line from $(0,R^{f})$ and to the right.  

Minimizing variance for a given expected return we will move as far to the "north-west" or to the "south-west' as possible in the (standard deviation, mean)-diagram. Therefore the mean-variance efficient portfolios will correspond to points on a line which is tangent to the mean-variance frontier of risky assets and goes through the point. $(0,R^{f})$ . There are two such lines, an upward-sloping. and a downward-sloping line. The point where the upward-sloping line is tangent to the frontier of risky assets corresponds to a portfolio which we refer to as the tangency portfolio. This is a portfolio of risky assets only. It is the portfolio that maximizes the Sharpe ratio over all risky portfolios. The Sharpe ratio of a portfolio is the ratio. $(\mathrm{E}[R^{\#}]-R^{f})/\sigma[R^{\#}]$ between the excess expected return of a portfolio and the standard deviation of the return. To determine the tangency portfolio we must solve the problem.  

$$
\operatorname*{max}_{\tilde{\pi}}\frac{\tilde{\pi}^{\top}\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}}{\left(\tilde{\pi}^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}\tilde{\pi}\right)^{1/2}}\quad\mathrm{~s.t.~}\quad\tilde{\pi}^{\top}{\bf1}=1.
$$  

Except for the tildes above the symbols, this problem is identical to the problem (6.27) with $\alpha=R^{f}$ which we have already solved. We can therefore conclude that the tangency portfolio is given by  

$$
\tilde{\pmb{\pi}}_{\mathrm{tan}}=\frac{\tilde{\Xi}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)}{\mathbf{1}^{\top}\tilde{\Xi}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)}.
$$  

The gross return on the tangency portfolio is  

$$
R_{\mathrm{tan}}=\tilde{\pi}_{\mathrm{tan}}^{\top}\tilde{R}
$$  

with expectation and standard deviation given by  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{\mu_{\mathrm{tan}}=\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}^{\top}\tilde{\pmb{\pi}}_{\mathrm{tan}}=\frac{\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}^{\top}\tilde{\pmb{\Sigma}}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)}{\mathbf{1}^{\top}\tilde{\pmb{\Sigma}}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)},}\ &{\qquad\quad\pmb{\pi}_{\mathrm{tan}}=\left(\tilde{\pmb{\pi}}_{\mathrm{tan}}^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}\tilde{\pmb{\pi}}_{\mathrm{tan}}\right)^{1/2}=\frac{\left((\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})^{\top}\tilde{\pmb{\Sigma}}^{-1}(\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})\right)^{1/2}}{\mathbf{1}^{\top}\tilde{\pmb{\Sigma}}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\pmb{\mu}}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)}.}\end{array}
$$  

The maximum Sharpe ratio, i.e. the slope of the line, is thus  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{\frac{\mu_{\tan}}{\sigma_{\tan}}=\frac{\displaystyle\frac{\tilde{\mu}^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)}{\mathbf{1}^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)}-R^{f}}{\displaystyle\frac{\left((\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})\right)^{1/2}}{\mathbf{1}^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})}}=\frac{\tilde{\mu}^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)-R^{f}\left[\mathbf{1}^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}\left(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)\right]}{\left((\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})\right)^{1/2}}}\ &{=\frac{\left(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1}\right)^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})}{\left((\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})\right)^{1/2}}=\left((\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})^{\top}\underline{{\tilde{\Sigma}}}^{-1}(\tilde{\mu}-R^{f}\mathbf{1})\right)^{1/2}.}\end{array}
$$  

The straight line from the point. $(0,R^{f})$ and to and through. $(\sigma_{\mathrm{tan}},\mu_{\mathrm{tan}})$ constitutes the upwardsloping part of the mean-variance frontier of all assets. Similarly, there is a downward-sloping part. which starts out at. $(0,R^{f})$ and has a slope which equals minus the slope of the upward-sloping. frontier. Again we have two-fund separation since all investors will combine just two funds, where one fund is simply the risk-free asset and the other is the tangency portfolio of only risky assets.. A return $R$ is mean-variance efficient if and only if  

$$
R=\alpha R^{f}+(1-\alpha)R_{\tan}
$$  

for some $\alpha$ . If $\alpha\leq1$ , you will get a point on the upward-sloping part of the frontier. If $\alpha\geq1$ , you will get a point on the downward-sloping part. Of course, when a risk-free return is traded, it will be the minimum-variance return. The relation between the mean $m$ and the standard deviation $\sigma$ of the portfolios on the efficient frontier will be  

$$
\sigma=|m-R^{f}|\frac{\sigma[R_{\mathrm{tan}}]}{\mathrm{E}[R_{\mathrm{tan}}]-R^{f}}.
$$  
