# 21.1 INTRODUCTION  

In this chapter, we introduce securitization, asset-backed securities (ABSs) and the modeling of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) as well as other credit structured products. We explain the eco-. nomic drivers of securitization, potential for misaligned interests, and the role of securitization in the run-up to the GFC. The securitization and CDO market has rebounded in recent years and we offer an outlook for these markets based on recent regulatory developments. The chapter also deals with credit indices, their implications in creating tranched securities..  

Tranching a basket of credit-risky instruments makes the trading and pricing of credit correlation possible. Once we learn how to strip correlation from tranched products we can price it and then trade it. The issues are discussed within credit default context, but the techniques themselves are very general and buying and selling correlation is routinely applied in creating equity and FX-based structured products as well as we saw in earlier chapters. Yet, in this chapter we focus on default correlation and discuss the issue using the credit names included in the iTraxx or, alternatively, CDX indices.  

The chapter also discusses more recent credit indices ABX and LCDX and credit structured products. Finally, we discuss one post-GFC financial innovation in the form of contingent convertibles (CoCos). CoCos are a hybrid product and we explain how valuation approaches from earlier chapters can be applied to the valuation of CoCos.  
