# HANDBOOK OF FIXED INCOME SECURITIES

[Fixed Income Analytics](Fixed%20Income%20Analytics.md)
[Fixed Income-Bonds Part 1](Fixed%20Income-Bonds%20Part%201.md)

[Bond Hedging](Bond%20Hedging.md)
[Bond Appendix](Bond%20Appendix.md)
[Bond Math](Bond%20Math.md)

[Forward Contract](Forward%20Contract.md)
[Forwards, Futures, and FRAs](Forwards,%20Futures,%20and%20FRAs.md)
[Forwards and Futures Notes](0.%20Finance%20Notes/1.%20Financial%20Instruments/Derivatives/Forward%20and%20Futures/Forwards%20and%20Futures%20Notes.md)
[Forward Rates Agreement](Forward%20Rates%20Agreement.md)

- The three main influences on the Treasury yield-curve shape are (1) the market's expectations of future rate changes, (2) bond risk premiums (expected return differentials across bonds of different maturities), and (3) convexity bias.
- A yield-curve is a graph of bond yields against their maturities. (Alternatively, bond yields may be plotted against their durations
- The bestknown yield-curves are the on-the-run Treasury curve and the interest-rate-swap curve.
- While the yield-to-maturity is a convenient summary measure of a bond's expected return—and therefore a popular tool in relative-value analysis—the use of a single rate to discount multiple cash flows can be problematic unless the yield-curve is flat. First, all cash flows of a given bond are discounted at the same rate, even if the yield-curve slope suggests that different discount rates are appropriate for different cash-flow dates.
- Second, the assumed reinvestment rate of a cash flow paid on a given date can vary across bonds because it depends on the yield of the bond to which the cash flow is attached.
- A coupon bond can be viewed as a bundle of zero-coupon bonds (zeros). It can be unbundled to a set of zeros that can be valued separately. Then these can be bundled back together into a more complex bond whose price should equal the sum of the component prices
- A single cash flow is easy to analyze, but its discount rate can be unbundled even further to one-period rates. A multiyear spot rate can be decomposed into a product of one-year forward rates, the simplest building blocks in a term structure of interest rates.
- The forward rate is the interest rate for a loan between any two dates in the future, contracted today. Any forward rate can be "locked in" today by buying one unit of the n-year zero at price Pn = 100/(1 + sn)n and by shortselling Pn/Pm units of the m-year zero at price Pm = 100/(1 + sm)m.
- To summarize, a par rate is used to discount a set of cash flows (those of a par bond) to today, a spot rate is used to discount a single future cash flow to today, and a forward rate is used to discount a single future cash flow to another (nearer) future date. The par yield-curve, the spot-rate curve, and the forward-rate curve contain the same information about today's term structure of interest rates
- In this example, the par and spot curves are monotonically upward-sloping, whereas the forward rate curve6 is first upward-sloping and then inverts (because of the flattening of the spot curve). The spot curve lies above the par curve, and the forward rate curve lies above the spot curve. This is always the case if the spot curve is upward-sloping. If it is inverted, the ordering is reversed: The par curve is highest, and the forward curve lowest. Thus loose characterizations of one curve (e.g., steeply upward-sloping, flat, inverted, humped) generally are applicable to the other curves. However, the three curves are identical only if they are horizontal. The forward rate curve magnifies any variation in the slope of the spot curve. One-year forward rates measure the marginal reward for lengthening the maturity of the investment by one year, whereas the spot rates measure an investment's average reward from today to maturity n. Therefore, spot rates are (geometric) averages of one or more forward rates. Similarly, par rates are averages of one or more spot rates; thus par curves have the flattest
- shape of the three curves.
- It is useful to view forward rates as break-even rates. The implied spot rates one year forward (f1,2, f1,3, f1,4, …) are, by construction, equal to such future spot rates that would make all government bonds earn the same return over the next year as the (riskless) one-year zero.
- The implied one-year spot rate one year forward (f1,2) is computed as the selling rate that would make the two-year zero's return [the left-hand side of Eq. (31-3)] equal to the oneyear spot rate [the right-hand side of Eq. (31-3)].
- Consider an example using numbers from Exhibit 31B–1 in Appendix 31B, where the one-year spot rate (s1) equals 6% and the two-year spot rate (s2) equals 8.08%. Plugging these spot rates into Eq. (31-3), we find that the implied one-year spot rate one year forward (f1,2) equals 10.20%. If this implied forward rate is exactly realized one year hence, today's two-year zero will be worth 100/1.1020 = 90.74 next year. Today, this zero is worth 100/1.08082 = 85.61; thus its return over the next year would be 90.74/85.61 − 1 = 6%, exactly the same as today's oneyear spot rate. Thus 10.20% is the break-even level of the future one-year spot rate.
- More generally, if the yield changes implied by the forward rates are realized subsequently, all government bonds, regardless of maturity, earn the same holding-period return. In addition, all self-financed positions of government bonds (such as long a barbell versus short a bullet) earn zero return; that is, they break even. However, if the yield-curve remains unchanged over a year, each n-year zero earns the corresponding one-year forward rate fn−1,n. This can be seen from Eq. (31-2) when m = n − 1; 1 + fn−1,n equals (1 + sn)n/(1 + sn−1)n−1, which is the holding-period return from buying an n-year zero at rate sn and selling it one year later at rate sn−1. Thus the one-year forward rate equals a zero's horizon return for an unchanged yield-curve.
- MAIN INFLUENCES ON THE YIELD-CURVE SHAPE
- The three main influences are the market's rate expectations, the bond risk premiums (expected return
- differentials across bonds), and the so-called convexity bias. In fact, these three components fully determine the yield-curve; it can be shown that the difference between each one-year forward rate and the one-year spot rate is approximately equal to the sum of an expected spot-rate change, a bond risk premium, and the convexity bias
- Expectations It is clear that the market's expectations of future rate changes are one important determinant of the yield-curve shape. For example, a steeply upward-sloping curve may indicate market expectations of near-term Fed tightening or of rising inflation. However, it may be too restrictive to assume that the yield differences across bonds with different maturities only reflect the market's rate expectations. The well-known pure expectations hypothesis has such an extreme implication. The pure expectations hypothesis asserts that all government bonds have the same near-term expected return (as the nominally riskless short-term bond) because the return-seeking activity of risk-neutral traders removes all expected return differentials across bonds. Near-term expected returns are equalized if all bonds that have higher yields than the short-term rate are expected to suffer capital losses that offset their yield advantage.
- When the market expects an increase in bond yields, the current term structure becomes upward-sloping so that any long-term bond's yield advantage and expected capital loss (owing to the expected yield increase) exactly offset each other.
- Stated differently, if investors expect that their long-term bond investments will lose value owing to an increase in interest rates, they will require a higher initial yield as a compensation for duration extension. Conversely, expectations of yield declines and capital gains will lower current long-term bond yields below the short-term rate, making the term structure inverted. The same logic—that positive (negative) initial yield spreads offset expected capital losses (gains) to equate near-term expected returns—also holds for combinations of bonds, including duration-neutral yield-curve positions.
- One example is a trade that benefits from the flattening of the yield-curve between 2and 10-year maturities: selling a unit of the 2-year bond, buying a duration-weighted amount (market value) of the 10-year bond, and putting the remaining proceeds from the sale to "cash" (very short-term bonds). Given the typical concave yield-curve shape, such a curve-flattening position earns a negative carry.8 The trade will be profitable only if the curve flattens enough to offset the impact of the negative carry. Implied forward rates indicate how much
- A concave shape means that the (upward-sloping) yield-curve is steeper in the front end than in the long end. The yield loss of moving from the two-year bond to cash is greater than the yield gain of moving from the two-year bond to the ten-year bond. Thus the yield earned from the combination of cash and tens is lower than the forgone yield from twos.
- flattening (narrowing of the twoto ten-year spread) is needed for the trade to break even.
- future level of rates influence the steepness of today's yield-curve, the market's expectations regarding the future steepness of the yield-curve influence the curvature of today's yield-curve. If the market expects more curve flattening, the negative carry of the flattening trades needs to be larger (to offset the expected capital gains), which makes today's yieldcurve more concave (curved). Exhibit 31-2 illustrates these points. This figure plots coupon bonds' yields against their durations or, equivalently, zeros' yields against their maturities, given various rate expectations. Ignoring the bond ri
- k premium and convexity bias, if the market expects no change in the level or slope of the curve, today's yield-curve will be horizontal. If the market expects a parallel rise in rates over the next year (but no reshaping), today's yield-curve will be linearly increasing (as a function of duration). If the market expects rising rates and a flattening curve, today's yield-curve will be increasing and concave (as a function of duration)
- Bond Risk Premium A key assumption in the pure expectations hypothesis is that all government bonds, regardless of maturity, have the same expected return. In contrast, many theories and empirical evidence suggest that expected returns vary across bonds. We define the bond risk premium as a longer-term bond's expected one-period return in excess of the one-period bond's riskless return. A positive bond risk
- In the same way as the market's expectations regarding th
- The classic liquidity premium hypothesis argues that most investors dislike short-term fluctuations in asset prices; these investors will hold long-term bonds only if they offer a positive risk premium as a compensation for their greater return volatility. Also, some modern asset-pricing theories suggest that the bond risk premium should increase with a bond's duration, its return volatility, or its covariance with market wealth. In contrast, the preferred-habitat hypothesis argues that the risk premium may decrease with duration; long-duration liability holders may perceive the long-term bond as the riskless asset and require higher expected returns for holding short-term assets.
- However, empirical studies also suggest that the bond risk premiums are not constant but vary over time. That is, it is possible to identify in advance periods when the near-term bond risk premiums are abnormally high or low. These premiums tend to be high after poor economic conditions when the yield-curve is steep, amid high inflation expectations and related inflation uncertainty. These premiums tend to be lower and even turn negative when Treasury prices benefit from safe-haven premiums (amid equity market weakness and negative stock-bond correlation, as in 1998 and 2002) or from scarcity premiums (amid fiscal surpluses and expectations of dwindling government bond markets, as in 2000).
- In particular, long-term bonds exhibit very high convexity (see panel a of
- which tends to depress their yields. Convexity bias refers to the impact these convexity differences have on the yield-curve shape.
- Convexity is closely related to the nonlinearity in the bond price–yield relationship. All noncallable bonds exhibit positive convexity; their prices rise more for a given yield decline than they fall for a similar yield increase. All else being equal, positive convexity is a desirable characteristic because it increases bond return (relative to return in the absence of convexity) whether yields go up or down—as long as they move somewhere.
- positive convexity can only improve a bond's performance (for a given yield), more convex bonds tend to have lower yields than less convex bonds with the same duration.12 In other words, investors tend to demand less yield if they have the prospect of improving their returns as a result of convexity. Investors are primarily interested in expected returns, and these high-convexity bonds can offer a given expected return at a lower yield level.
- Panel b of Exhibit 31-4 illustrates the pure impact of convexity on the curve shape by plotting the spot-rate curve and the curve of one-year forward rates when all bonds have the same expected return (8%) and the short-term rates are expected to remain at the current level. With no bond risk premiums and no expected rate
- changes, one might expect these curves to be horizontal at 8%. Instead, they slope down at an increasing pace because lower yields are needed to offset the convexity advantage of longer-duration bonds and thereby to equate the near-term expected returns across bonds.13 Short-term bonds have little convexity, so there is little convexity bias at the front end of the yield-curve, but convexity can have a dramatic impact on the curve shape at very long durations. Convexity bias can be one of the main reasons for the typical concave yield-curve shape (i.e., for the tendency of the curve to flatten or invert at long durations).
- The value of convexity increases with the magnitude of yield changes. Therefore, increasing volatility should make the overall yield-curve shape more concave (curved) and widen the spreads between more and less convex bonds (duration-matched coupon bonds versus zeros and barbells versus bullets).
- A steeply upwardsloping curve can reflect either the market's expectations of rising rates or a high required risk premium. A strongly humped curve (i.e., high curvature) can reflect
- Putting the Pieces Together
- the market's expectations of either curve flattening or high volatility (which makes convexity more valuable) or even the concave shape of the risk premium curve.
- Forwards as Break-Even Rates for Active Yield-Curve Views
- The forward rates show a path of break-even future rates and spreads.
- It incorporates directly the impact of carry on the profitability of the trade. For example, a manager should take a bearish portfolio position only if she expects rates to rise by more than what the forwards imply. However, if she expects rates to rise, but by less than what the forwards imply (i.e., by less than what is needed to offset the positive carry), she should take
- a bullish portfolio position. If the manager's forecast is correct, the position will be profitable. In contrast, managers who take bearish portfolio positions whenever they expect bond yields to rise—ignoring the forwards—may find that their positions lose money, because of the negative carry, even though their rate forecasts are correct
- If forward rates are realized, all positions earn the same return. If yields rise by more than the forwards imply, bearish positions are profitable, and bullish positions lose money. If yields rise by less than the forwards imply, the opposite is true.
- Abnormally high forward rates are more visible than high spot or par rates because the latter are averages of forward rates
- Forwards as Indicators of Cheap Maturity Sectors
- Once an investor has identified a sector with abnormally high forward rates (e.g., between 9 and 12 years), she can exploit the cheapness of this sector by buying a bond that matures at the end of the period (12 years) and by selling a bond that matures at the beginning of the period (9 years). If equal market values of these bonds are bought and sold, or received and paid fixed in swaps, the position captures the cheap forward rate (in this case the 3-year rate 9 years forward).
- In par-curve terms, the position is exposed to a general increase in rates and a steepening yield-curve. More elaborate trades can be constructed (e.g., by selling both the 9and 15-year bonds against the 12-year bonds with appropriate weights) to retain level and slope neutrality. To the extent that bumps and kinks in the forward curve reflect temporary local cheapness, the trade will earn capital gains when the forward curve becomes flatter and the cheap sector richens (in addition to the higher yield and rolldown the position earns).
- When the yield-curve is upward-sloping, long-term bonds' yield advantage over the riskless short-term bond provides a cushion against rising yields. In a sense, duration extensions are "cheap" when the yield-curve is very steep and the cushion (positive carry) is large. These trades only lose money if capital losses caused by rising rates offset the initial yield advantage. Moreover, the longer-term bonds' rolling yield advantage 17 over the short-term bond is even larger than their yield advantage. The one-year forward rate (fn−1, n) is, by construction, equal to the n-year zero's rolling yieldThus it is a direct measure of the n-year zero's rolling yield advantage.
- - Another forward-related measure, the change in the (n − 1)-year spot rate implied by the forwards (f1,n − sn−1) tells how much the yield-curve has to shift to offset this advantage and to equate the holdingperiod returns of the n-year zero and the one-year zero.
- long-term bonds have higher (lower) near-term expected returns than short-term bonds when the forward rate curve is upwardsloping (downward-sloping)
- As bonds age, they roll down the upward-sloping yield-curve and earn some rolldown return (capital gain owing to this yield change) if the yield-curve remains unchanged. A bond's rolling yield, or horizon return, includes both the yield and the rolldown return given a scenario of no change in the yield-curve
- Equation (31C.1) shows the same relation in an approximate but simpler form; this equation ignores nonlinear effects such as the convexity bias. The relation is exact if spot rates and forward rates are continuously compounded.
- Equation (31C.2) shows that the forward rate is equal to an n-year zero's one-year horizon return given an unchanged yield-curve scenario: a sum of the initial yield and the rolldown return [the zero's duration at horizon (n – 1) multiplied by the amount the zero rolls down the yield-curve as it ages]. This horizon return is often called the rolling yield. Thus the one-year forward rates proxy for near-term expected returns at different parts of the yield-curve if the yield-curve is expected to remain unchanged. We can gain intuition about the equality of the one-year forward rate and the rolling yield by examining the n-year zero's realized holding-period return hn over the next year, in Eq. (31C.3). The zero earns its initial yield sn plus a capital gain/loss that is approximated by the product of the zero's year-end duration and its realized yield change.
- Equation (31C.2) shows that the (one-year) forward rate curve lies above the spot curve as long as the latter is upward-sloping (and the rolldown return is positive). Conversely, if the spot curve is inverted, the rolldown return is negative, and the forward rate curve lies below the spot curve. If the spot curve is first rising and then declining, the forward rate curve crosses it from above at its peak. Finally, the forward rate curve can become downward-sloping even when the spot curve is upward-sloping if the spot curve's slope is first steep and then flattens
- the total expected return of any government bond position can be viewed as the sum of a few simple building blocks: (1) the yield income, (2) the rolldown return, (3) the value of convexity, and (4) the duration impact of the rate view
- A bond's nearterm expected return is a sum of its horizon return given an unchanged yield-curve and its expected return from expected changes in the yield-curve. The first item, the horizon return, is also called the rolling yield because it is a sum of the bond's yield income and the rolldown return (the capital gain that the bond earns because its yield declines as its maturity shortens and it "rolls down" an upward-sloping yield-curve). The second item, the expected return from expected changes in the yield-curve, can be approximated by duration and convexity effects. The duration impact is zero if the yield-curve is expected to remain unchanged, but it may be the main source of expected return if the rate predictions are based on an investor's or economist's market view or on a quantitative forecasting model.
- Expectations for parallel increases in yields tend to make today's term structure linearly upward sloping, and expectations for falling yields tend to make today's term structure inverted. Expectations for future curve flattening induce today's spotand forward-rate curves to be concave (functions of maturity), and expectations for future curve steepening induce today's spotand forward-rate curves to be convex
- The traditional intuition is based on the pure expectations hypothesis. In the absence of risk premia and convexity bias, a long rate is a weighted average of the expected short rates over the life of the long bond. If the short rates are expected to rise, the expected average future short rate (i.e., the long rate) is
- higher than the current short rate, making today's term structure upward-sloping.
- A similar logic explains why expectations of falling rates make today's term structure inverted.
- The absence of risk premia means that all bonds, independent of maturity, have the same near-term expected return. Recall that a bond's holdingperiod return equals the sum of the initial yield and the capital gains/losses that yield changes cause. Therefore, if all bonds are to have the same expected return, initial yield differentials across bonds must offset any expected capital gains/ losses.
- Similarly, each bond portfolio with expected capital gains must have a yield disadvantage relative to the riskless asset. If investors expect the long bonds to gain value because of a decline in interest rates, they accept a lower initial yield for long bonds than for short bonds, making today's spotand forward-rate curves inverted.
- Conversely, if investors expect the long bonds to lose value because of an increase in interest rates, they demand a higher initial yield for long bonds than for short bonds, making today's spotand forward-rate curves upward-sloping. Similarly, if investors expect the curve-flattening positions to earn capital gains because of future curve flattening, they accept a lower initial yield for these positions. In such a case, barbells would have lower yields than duration-matched bullets (to equate their near-term expected returns), making today's spotand forward-rate curves concave. A converse logic links the market's curve-steepening expectations to convex spotand forward-rate curves.
- The preceding analysis presumes that all bond positions have the same near-term expected returns. In reality, investors require higher returns for holding long bonds than short bonds.
- Historical average returns increase substantially with duration at the front end of the curve but only modestly beyond intermediate durations. Thus the bond risk premia make the term structure upward-sloping and concave, on average.
- Convexity bias refers to the impact that the nonlinearity of a bond's price/ yield-curve has on the shape of the term structure. This impact is very small at the front end but can be quite significant at very long durations.
- A positively convex price/yield-curve has the property that a given yield decline raises the bond price more than a yield increase of equal magnitude reduces it. All else
- equal, this property makes a high-convexity bond more valuable than a lowconvexity bond, especially if the volatility is high. It follows that investors tend to accept a lower initial yield for a more convex bond because they have the prospect of enhancing their returns as a result of convexity. Because a long bond exhibits much greater convexity than a short bond, it can have a lower yield and yet offer the same near-term expected return
- Thus, in the absence of bond risk premia, the convexity bias would make the term structure inverted. In the presence of positive bond risk premia, the convexity bias tends to make the term structure humped—because the negative effect of convexity bias overtakes the positive effect of bond risk premia only at long durations. An increase in the interest-rate volatility makes the bias stronger and thus tends to make the term structure more humped
- Forward rates are good measures of the market's rate expectations only if the bond risk premia and the convexity bias can be ignored.
- The steepness of the curve on a given day depends mainly on the market's view regarding the rate direction, but in the long run, the impact of positive and negative rate expectations largely washes out. Therefore, the average upward slope of the yieldcurve is mainly attributable to positive bond risk premia.
- On a given day, the spot-rate curve is especially concave (humped) if market participants have strong expectations of future curve flattening or of high future volatility. In the long run, the reshaping expectations should wash out, and the average concave shape of the term structure reflects the concavity of the risk premium curve and the convexity bias.
- Decomposing Forward Rates into Their Main Determinants
- Exhibit 32-1 shows how the yield change of an n-year zero-coupon bond over one period (dashed arrow) can be split to the rolldown yield change and the oneperiod change in an n − 1 year constant-maturity spot rate sn−1(∆sn−1 = s* n−1 − sn−1) (two solid arrows).4 A zero-coupon bond's price can be split in a similar way (see Appendix 32A). Thus an n-year zero's holding-period return over the next period hn is
- hn = return if the curve is unchanged + return from the curve changes = rolling yield + percentage price change (at horizon) ≈ (one-period) forward rate + [(−duration × ∆sn−1) + (0.5 × convexity × ∆sn−1)2]
- Equation (32-1) is based on the following relations. First, a bond's oneperiod horizon return given an unchanged yield-curve is called the rolling yield. A zero-coupon bond's rolling yield equals the one-period forward rate (fn–1,n). For example, if the four-year (five-year) constant-maturity rate remains unchanged at 9.5% (10%) over the next year, a five-year zero bought today at 10% can be sold next year at 9.5% as a four-year zero; then the bond's horizon return is 1.105/1.0954 − 1 = 0.1202 = 12.02%, which is the one-year forward rate between fourand five-year maturities
- The second source of a zero's holding-period return, the price change caused by the yield-curve
- shift, is approximated very well by duration and convexity effects for all but extremely large yield-curve shifts.
- It is more interesting to relate the forward rates to expected returns and expected rate changes than to the realized ones. We take expectations of both sides of Eq. (32-1), split the bond's expected holding-period return into the short rate and the bond risk premium, and recall that E(∆sn–1)2 ≈ [vol(∆sn–1)]2. Then we can rearrange the equation to express the one-period forward rate as a sum of the other terms: Forward rate ≈ short rate + duration × E(∆sn–1) + bond risk premium + convexity bias (32-2) where bond risk premium = E(hn − s1), and convexity bias ≈ −0.5 × convexity × [vol(∆sn–1)]2. If we move the short rate to the left-hand side of the equation, we decompose the "forward-spot premium" (fn–1,n– s1) into a rate-expectation term, a risk-premium term, and a convexity term We interpret the expectations in Eq. (32-2) as the market's rate and volatility expectations and as the expected risk premium that the market requires for holding long-term bonds. The market's expectations are weighted averages of individual market participants' expectations.
- The yield curve shifts whenever there is a change in either long-run or shortrun expectations, about either future real interest rates or future inflation. (Note that in the long run, real interest rates are generally thought to be determined by the real growth rate of the economy.)
- A futures contract is an agreement between a buyer (seller) and an established futures exchange or its clearinghouse in which the buyer (seller) agrees to take (make) delivery of a specific amount of a valued item such as a commodity, stock, or bond at a specified price during a designated time. For some futures contracts, settlement at expiration is in cash rather than actual delivery
- When an investor takes a position in the market by buying a futures contract, the investor is said to be long the futures
- Futures contracts based on a financial instrument or a financial index are known as financial futures. Financial futures can be classified as interest-rate futures, stock index futures, or currency futures. T
- suppose that X buys a futures contract and Y sells a futures contract on a 6% five-year Treasury note for settlement one year from now. Suppose also that the price at which X and Y agree to transact one year from now is$100. This is the futures price. This means that one year from now Y must deliver a 6% five-year Treasury note and will receive$100. X will take delivery of a 6% five-year Treasury note and will pay$100.
- The profit or loss realized by the buyer or seller of a futures contract depends on the price and interest rate on the delivery date. For example, if the market price of a 6% five-year Treasury note at the settlement date is$110, because rates have declined, the buyer profits, paying$100 for a security that is worth$110. In contrast, the seller loses, because an instrument worth$110 must be delivered in exchange for$100. If interest rates rise on 6% five-year Treasury notes so that the market price is$90, the seller of the futures contract profits and the buyer loses
- When the investor first takes a position in a futures contract, he must deposit a minimum dollar amount per contract as specified by the exchange. As the price of the futures contract fluctuates, the value of the investor's equity in the position changes. At the close of each trading day, any market gain results in an increase in the investor's equity, whereas any market loss results in a decrease. This process is referred to as marking to market. Should an investor's equity position fall below an amount determined by the exchange, he must provide additional margin. On the other hand, if an investor's equity increases, he may withdraw funds. Consequently, a futures position may require substantial cash flows before the delivery date
- BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF FORWARD CONTRACTS
- A forward contract is much like a futures contract. A forward contract is an agreement for the future delivery of some amount of a valued item at a specified price at a designated time. Futures contracts are standardized agreements that define the delivery date (or month) and quality and quantity of the deliverable. Futures contracts are traded on organized exchanges. A forward contract is, in contrast, usually nonstandardized and is traded over the counter by direct contact between buyer and seller.
- the investor's opening position is the sale of a futures contract,
- short the futures
- Although both futures and forward contracts set forth terms of delivery, futures contracts are not intended to be settled by delivery. In fact, generally only a small percentage of outstanding futures contracts are delivered or go to final settlement. However, forward contracts are intended to be held to final settlement. Many of the most popular forward contracts, however, settle in cash rather than actual delivery.
- Finally, both parties in a forward contract are exposed to credit risk because either party may default on its obligation. In contrast, credit risk for futures contracts is minimal because the clearing corporation associated with the exchange guarantees the other side of each transaction
- BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF OPTION CONTRACTS
- An option is a contract in which the seller of the option grants the buyer of the option the right to purchase from, or sell to, the contract seller a designated instrument at a specified price within a specified period of time. The seller (or writer) grants this right to the buyer in exchange for a certain sum of money, called the option price or option premium
- The price at which the instrument may be bought or sold is called the exercise or strike price. The date after which an option is void is called the expiration date.
- An American option may be exercised any time up to and including the expiration date. A European option may be exercised only on the expiration date. A Bermudan option can be exercise only on predetermined dates.
- When an option writer grants the buyer the right to purchase the designated instrument, it is called a call option. When the option buyer has the right to sell the designated instrument to the writer, the option is called a put option.
- The buyer of an option is said to be long the option; the writer is said to be short the option.
- Consider, for example, an option on a 6% five-year Treasury note with one year to expiration and an exercise price of$100. Suppose that the option price is$2 and the current price of the Treasury note is$100 with a yield of 6%. If the option is a call option, then the buyer of the option has the right to purchase a 6% five-year Treasury note for$100 within one year. The writer of the option must sell the Treasury note for$100 to the buyer if he or she exercises the option. Suppose that the interest rate on the Treasury note declines and its price rises to$110. By exercising the call option, the buyer realizes a profit, paying$100 for a Treasury note that is worth$110. After considering the cost of buying the option,$2, the net profit is$8. The writer of the option loses$8. If, instead, the market interest rate rises and the price of the Treasury note falls below$100, the call option buyer will not exercise the option, losing the option price of$2. The writer will realize a profit of$2. Therefore, the buyer of a call option benefits
- from a decline in interest rates (a rise in the price of the underlying fixed income instrument) and the writer loses. If the option is a put rather than a call and the interest rate on Treasury notes declines and the price rises above$100, the option buyer will not exercise the option. The buyer will lose the entire option price. If, on the other hand, the interest rate on Treasury notes rises and the note's price falls below$100, the option buyer will benefit by exercising the put option. In the case of a put option, the option buyer benefits from a rise in interest rates (a decline in the price of the underlying fixed income instrument) and the option seller loses. The maximum amount that an option buyer can lose is the option price. The maximum profit that the option writer (seller) can realize is the option price. The option buyer has substantial potential upside return, whereas the option writer has substantial downside risk.
- Options can be written on cash instruments or futures. The latter are called futures options and are traded only on exchanges. Options on cash instruments are also traded on exchanges but have been traded much more successfully over the counter. These OTC, or dealer, options are tailor-made options on specific Treasury issues, mortgage securities, or interest-rate indexes.
- DIFFERENCES BETWEEN OPTIONS AND FUTURES (FORWARD) CONTRACTS
- Unlike a futures or forward contract, an option gives the buyer the right but not the obligation to perform. The option seller has the obligation to perform. In the case of a futures or forward contact, both the buyer and seller are obligated to perform. In addition, the buyer of a futures or forward contract does not pay the seller to accept the obligation, whereas in the case of an option, the buyer pays the seller an option premium
- Consequently, the risk/reward characteristics of the two contracts also differ. In a futures or forward contract, the long position realizes a dollar-for-dollar gain when the price of the futures or forward increases and suffers a dollar-fordollar loss when the price of the futures or forward decreases. The opposite holds for a short position. Options do not provide such a symmetric risk/reward relationship. The most a long position may lose is the option premium, yet the long retains all the upside potential. However, the gain is always reduced by the price of the option. The maximum profit the short position may realize is the option price, but the short position has substantial downside risk
- Treasury Bond Futures Contract The Treasury bond (T-bond) futures contract is the most successful interest-rate (or commodity) futures contract. Prices and yields on the T-bond futures contract are quoted in terms of a (fictitious) 20-year 6% Treasury bond, but the exchange where the contract is traded, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), allows many different bonds to be delivered in satisfaction of a short position in the contract. Specifically, any Treasury bond with a remaining maturity of at least 15 years, but less than 25 years, from the first day of the delivery month is acceptable for delivery. There is an Ultra Long Treasury futures contract that differs only in that it is based on Treasury bonds with at least 25 years to maturity. The T-bond futures contract calls for the short (i.e., the seller) to deliver$100,000 face value of any one of the qualifying Treasury bonds. However, because the coupons and maturities vary widely, the price that the buyer pays the seller depends on which bond the seller chooses to deliver. The rule used by the CME is one that adjusts the futures price by a conversion factor that reflects the price the bond would sell for at the beginning of the delivery month if it were yielding 6%. Using such a rule, the conversion factor for a given bond and a given delivery month is constant through time and is not affected by changes in the price of the bond or the price of the futures contract. The seller has the right to choose which qualifying bond to deliver and when during the delivery month delivery will take place. When the bond is delivered, the buyer is obligated to pay the seller the futures price multiplied by the appropriate conversion factor, plus accrued interest on the delivered bond. It is important to emphasize that while the underlying Treasury bond for this contract is a hypothetical issue and therefore cannot itself be delivered into the futures contract, the bond futures contract is not a cash settlement contract. To close out a Treasury bond futures contract, one can either initiate an offsetting futures position or deliver a qualifying issue. Paradoxically, the success of the CME Treasury bond contract can in part be attributed to the fact that the delivery mechanism is not as simple as it may first appear. There are several options implicit in a position in bond futures. First, the seller chooses which bond to deliver. Thus, the seller has an option to swap between bonds. If the seller is holding bond A for delivery, but bond B becomes
- cheaper to deliver, she can swap bond B for bond A and make a more profitable delivery. Second, within some guidelines set by the CME, the seller decides when during the delivery month delivery will take place. She thus has a timing option that can be used to her advantage. Finally, the short retains the possibility of making the wildcard play. This potentially profitable situation arises from the fact that the seller can give notice of intent to deliver for several hours after the exchange has closed and the futures settlement price has been fixed. In a falling market, the seller can use the wildcard option to profit from the fixed delivery price.
- Treasury Note Futures There are seven Treasury note futures contracts: 10-year on the run, 10-year, the Ultra 10-year, 5-year on-the-run, 5-year, 2-year on-the-run, and 2-year. Four of the seven contracts are modeled after the Treasury bond futures contract and are traded on the CME. The on-the-run contracts are also traded on the CME, but they are cash settled. The underlying instrument for the 10-year Treasury note futures contract is$100,000 par value of a hypothetical 10-year 6% Treasury note. There are several acceptable Treasury issues that may be delivered by the short. A note is acceptable if the maturity is not less than 6.5 years and not greater than 10 years from the first day of the delivery month. The delivery options granted to the short position are the same as for the Treasury bond futures contract. For the five-year Treasury note futures contract, the underlying is$100,000 par value of a U.S. Treasury note that satisfies the following conditions: an original maturity of not more than five years and three months and a remaining maturity of not less than four years and two months as of the first day of the delivery month. The underlying for the two-year Treasury note futures contract is$200,000 par value of a U.S. Treasury note with a remaining maturity of not more than two years and not less than one year and nine months. Moreover, the original maturity of the note delivered to satisfy the two-year futures cannot be more than five years and three months. As mentioned earlier, there are several Treasury securities that are eligible for delivery by the seller of the futures contract. Consider the 10-year Treasury Note futures: the underlying security of 10-year Treasury Note with 6% coupon is a hypothetical security. In fact, the 6% coupon is very far from the yield levels after the Great Financial Crisis of 2008–2009; it was defined many years earlier, when a 6% coupon or yield was typical for a 10-year Treasury note. Over recent years, when 10-year Treasury yield has been in the range of 0.5% to 3.3%, the futures contract price has been inflated due to this high 6% hypothetical coupon
- relative to the much lower yield levels. However, once the actual bonds that are eligible for delivery get "converted" to the theoretical 6% security, the invoice price will get adjusted to the current market conditions. To make an informed decision which security to deliver, the seller has to calculate the actual price she would receive when the futures contract settles: Invoice Price = Futures Settlement Price × Conversion Factor + Accrued Interest The conversion factor brings all eligible securities to the "common denominator" (i.e., it is the present value of the cash flow of a deliverable bond, discounted by a 6% yield). The cheapest-to-deliver security would be a deliverable bond with the lowest converted futures price
- To illustrate this, let us take a look at the 2020 September 10-year Treasury futures contract as of June 10, 2020. The futures price is 138-05+, optically quite high, given the gap between the 6% theoretical coupon and the below 1% 10-year yield these days. The following table shows three of the many eligible securities:
- Security Price Conversion Factor Gross Basis T 2 3/8 05/15/27 112-05 ¼ 0.8072 20.215 T 2 ¼ 08/15/27 111-18 ¾ 0.7943 58.753 T 0 5/8 03/31/27 100-09 0.7142 51.165
- The gross basis would indicate that the first bond in the above table would be the cheapest-to-deliver. The seller would buy this bond today at 112-05¼ price (112.1641 in decimal terms), and would receive 0.8072 × 138-05+ (111.5352 in decimal terms) from the futures contract buyer (paid and received accrued interest would net each other out). The net difference is –$0.6317, or 20.215 ticks (0.6317 × 32). When yields are below 6%, the cheapest-to-deliver bond is typically one of the lower duration eligible bonds, and when yields are higher than 6%, the cheapest-to-deliver would typically be a longer-duration bond.
- Treasury Bill Futures Contract The futures contract on Treasury bills was the first contract on a short-term debt instrument and has been the model for most subsequent contracts on short-term debt. The contract traded on the International Money Market (a division of the CME) is based on three-month Treasury bills with a face value of$1 million. The contract is quoted and traded in terms of a futures "price,'' but the futures price is, in fact, just a different way of quoting the futures interest rate. Specifically, the futures price is the annualized futures rate subtracted from 100. For example, a futures price of 97.50 means that Treasury bills are trading in the futures market at a rate of 2.50%. The actual price that the buyer pays the seller is calculated using the usual formula for Treasury bills: Invoice price =$1,000,000 × [1 − rate × (days to maturity/360)] where the rate is expressed in decimal form. As this formula shows, each basis point change in the interest rate (or each 0.01 change in the futures price) leads to a$25 change in the invoice price for a 90-day bill. Consequently, the value of a 0.01 change in the futures contract is always$25. The Treasury bill futures contract is considerably simpler than the T-bond and T-note futures contracts. First, because all Treasury bills of the same maturity are economically equivalent, there is effectively only one deliverable issue, namely, Treasury bills with three months to maturity. Three months may have 90, 91, or 92 days depending on the month in which the contract is initiated. The fact that the three-month bills may be either new three-month bills or older bills that currently have three months of remaining life makes little difference because the new and old issues will trade the same in the cash market. Thus, all the subtleties surrounding conversion factors and most deliverable issues are absent from the Treasury bill futures market. Furthermore, there is little uncertainty or choice involved in the delivery date because delivery must take place during a very narrow time frame, usually a three-day period. The rules of the exchange make clear well in advance the exact dates on which delivery will take place. Finally, because there are no conversion factors, there is no wildcard play in the Treasury bill futures market. Although the Treasury bill futures contract is simple and thus may not provide as many speculative and arbitrage opportunities as the more complex longand intermediate-term futures contracts, it does provide a straightforward means of hedging or speculating on the short end of the yield curve. Because the Treasury bill rate is a benchmark off which other short-term rates may be priced, the bill contract fills a well-defined need of many market participants.
