---
title: Class Note 10 Liquidity and [[Class Note 10 Liquidity and Liquidity Management|liquidity
  management]]
tags:
  - asset_liquidity
  - balance_sheet
  - financial_intermediaries
  - illiquidity
  - liquidity_management
aliases:
  - Class Note 10
  - Illiquid Assets
  - Liquidity
key_concepts:
  - asset's true value
  - avoid a crisis
  - borrow in the future
  - illiquid asset bid-ask spread
  - perfectly liquid asset
---

# Class Note 10 Liquidity and [[Class Note 10 Liquidity and Class Note 10 Liquidity and Liquidity Managementliquidity management|liquidity management]]

# I. **An Overview Of [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|Liquidity]] Management**

A common measure of the [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] of an asset is the % of its true value one can obtain from a quick "forced" sale. Adverse selection issues and special asset services (such as monitoring of special information about the borrower) can make assets illiquid. An illiquid asset is,  roughly,  one with a large bid-ask spread. This is only rough because illiquidity also implies that one expects to get a better price if one has time to wait until the asset is sold (i.e.,  a bigger [[Class Note 9 Bid and Ask Prices With Private Information|bid-ask spread]] for quick sales or (in the case of assets which mature,  for sales before maturity).

An asset is perfectly liquid if the holder does not expect to care if he is forced to sell at an unknown date. Apart from tax considerations,  treasury securities and most NYSE stocks are in this category. If you (an individual) owned such an asset and were forced to sell (liquidate) with one day's notice (not on the weekend) you would not be upset,  because you would get a fair market price.

On the other hand,  it the asset were a house or a private placement bond,  you would be very upset if you were forced to sell on one day's notice. In less developed countries,  the financial markets are often illiquid,  with little ability to get a fair price on short notice.

If you knew in advance that you would need cash on some fixed date in advance,  you could arrange to hold an illiquid asset which matured on that date. The demand for always having [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] is due to uncertainty about when you will be forced to liquidate. These uncertainties for an individual include unexpected expenses,  loss of a job,  etc.

The [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] of an asset does not relate directly to the **risk** of the asset,  i.e.,  not to fluctuations in its true value. Instead,  it relates to the "costs" of selling it in a hurry.

### [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|Liquidity]] risk sharing

Given that certain assets are illiquid,  someone must hold illiquid assets. If there were no financial intermediaries,  then individuals would have to hold them directly,  and incur the liquidation costs whenever there was a personal need for [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]].

A partial substitute for holding liquid assets is the ability to borrow in the future at a favorable rate of interest. An individual or firm can get into a *[[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] crisis* if unable to borrow and unable to sell off assets. The two ways to avoid such a crisis are to hold liquid assets and to have a sure ability to borrow (either due to an explicit contract,  like a line of credit,  or absolute faith that you will be able to borrow in the market). [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|Liquidity]] and financial intermediaries Banks can provide [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] to customers either by offering deposits which are very liquid,  or by offering lines of credit. Offering either one when a bank owns some illiquid assets exposes the bank to some [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] risk of its own.

When the net effect of withdrawals of deposits and take-downs of lines of credit yields an outflow of cash from the bank,  something else on the bank's balance sheet must adjust. If the bank has substantial uncertainty about these net flows of cash,  then it must structure its balance sheet to take these fluctuations into account. If the bank was not expected to be able to meet the [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] demands that is implied by offering liquid deposits and lines of credit,  then the bank would not be able to credibly offer these products. We will see that this "credibility" issue means that having [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] today in the form of the ability to issue new deposits requires the expectations that the bank will have access to [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] in the future. That is,  anticipations of [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] problems can lead to current [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] problems.

| Sources of a Bank's [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|Liquidity]] Liquid assets: 1. Maturing assets (Asset 2. Liquid assets (small bid-ask spread) management) 3. Assets that can serve as collateral for a repurcha   |                                                     | se                                               |                                                 |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                     | agreement,       but not yet pledged ("not yet RPed"). |                                                 |
| Borrowing                                                                                                                                                                          | 1. Issue new deposits in spot market                |                                                  |                                                 |
| Ability                                                                                                                                                                            | 2. Borrow [[A Guide to the Front End and Basis Swap Markets#Federal Funds Market|Fed Funds]] from other banks (spot market)  |                                                  |                                                 |
| (Liability                                                                                                                                                                         | 3. Lines of credit for [[A Guide to the Front End and Basis Swap Markets#Federal Funds Market|Fed Funds]] from other banks   |                                                  |                                                 |
| Management)                                                                                                                                                                        | 4. Federal Reserve discount window                  |                                                  |                                                 |
| Some of                                                                                                                                                                            | 1. Contracts to sell illiquid assets to other banks | in the                                           |                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                    | Both                                                |                                                  | future (such as loan participation agreements). |

Asset management of [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] implies that when the bank experiences a net cash outflow,  it adjusts by reducing the size of assets (selling assets) and it protects itself by having many liquid assets around to make the cost of this adjustment low. Until the last 10-15 years,  this was the main method of managing [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] risk. A bank would hold a portfolio of government bonds to sell off if it needed to make loans under its lines of credit,  or to fund net withdrawals of deposits. This used to be the only option when rates were regulated on deposits,  since the bank could not adjust the interest rate to attract additional deposits. In addition,  the interbank Federal Funds market was less active than it is today,  and was not used as a major source of funds by many banks. As a result,  the banks' borrowing opportunities were limited and sale of liquid assets was the primary available source of [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]].

The more recent **liability management** approach lets the bank adjust interest rates on liabilities to attract additional funds when needed. This approach works well if the bank can attract large quantities of new funds without making a large change in the interest rate which it pays. In some sense,  this is related to the elasticity of supply of deposits to the bank. If the bank can attract sufficient new deposits when current depositors withdraw or when lines of credit are taken down,  then it never need liquidate any assets. The problem is,  that the bank may not be able to borrow exactly when it most needs to borrow. In extreme,  this is the problem of the threat of bank runs. Continental Bank (among others) experienced this problem.

# II. An Outline of Managing [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|Liquidity]] When Depositors Can **Panic (best read after** class note 11 on bank runs)

## 1. **Tactical [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|Liquidity]] Management**

a. Predict the volatility normal fluctuations (those without a panic) in the withdrawal of deposits and takedowns of lines of credit.

b. Determine the costs of asset management (foregone expected return from holding very liquid assets) and liability management (the costs of maintaining borrowing ability) to deal with these normal [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] needs.

c. Take account of how news about the bank's net worth or future profitability will influence its ability to borrow and to maintain its current deposits. This involves estimating how quickly those who lend to the bank will get nervous and pull out their funds. This is a measure of how risks in the bank's fundamentals will effect [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] risk.

d. Choose the assets and liabilities that reflect these risks and costs of a [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|liquidity]] crisis.

## 2. **Strategic [[Financial Markets and Institutions/III. Liquidity of Assets/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization/Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization.md|Liquidity]] Management: Influencing The Risk Of A Panic For Given** Fundamentals

a. Control the response to news or rumors about your institution by managing the information flow to your clients. This involves having access to your depositors to disclose information if there are rumors regarding your institution's soundness.

b. Control the ability for identical information (especially misinformation) to reach your depositors simultaneously. This is important to prevent a coordinated move in expectations of others expectations; the input for a bank run. In the old days,  this meant preventing the line of people who are withdrawing from spilling into the street (add more tellers,  have a large lobby,  etc.). If "N" is the number of people withdrawing,  do not put N on the time and temperature sign.

c. A modern way of **putting** N on the time and temperature sign is to allow all depositors to see information about the secondary market price of a bank's uninsured CD's. Not putting it on the time and temperature sign requires that they not see this price. When the secondary market price drops (relative to other banks' CD's of the same maturity),  it indicates excess supply of the CD's that have not yet matured (selling pressure indicating possible bad news or bad misinformation). This **common information to all large depositors** of excess supply can indicate that a bank run may be starting (currently maturing deposits are being withdrawn),  or it may start one,  just like a mistaken headline in the newspaper "Bank Run Today."
Because there is a secondary market for bank CD's,  the only way from keeping depositors from learning about the information that causes the price to change (relative to other banks) is to prevent the price from changing (relative to other banks). To avoid information contagion,  many large banks stabilize the secondary market price of their CD's. By having an investment bank keep their CD trading at the same secondary market price as other large money-center banks,  no information is revealed from the price (the N on the time and temperature sign never changes). However,  keeping the price (relative to other CD's) constant in the face of selling pressure requires that the investment bank buy the CD's from the sellers at the fixed price. The CD's bought by the investment bank are then cashed in early by the bank (one day later),  effectively turning the time deposits into demand deposits. The direct effects of this are to make any already given run worse: not only maturing deposits must be paid off,  but also those that did not mature but were repurchased.

The indirect effects are favorable,  because it prevents coordinated contagion of beliefs about N. This serves to keep a panic from beginning. The fact that banks choose to do this suggests that they are concerned about panics,  and have some notion of how to deal with them.

The role of the investment bank involves a small amount of delegated monitoring. It the I-bank sees an excess supply of the bank's CD's,  it will buy them at the fixed price only if it expects the bank to stay in business until it can sell them back to the bank (stay open at least one more day). If the news generating the run were that the bank was about to be closed,  the I-bank would not stabilize the price.