# 18.1 INTRODUCTION  

In the previous chapters, we examined the application of financial engineering to forwards, futures, swaps, and options. In this discussion, for simplicity we abstracted away from issues related to credit risk. In the present and the following chapters, we will discuss financial engineering applications related to credit risk, credit derivatives, and credit structured products.  

Credit derivatives have had a revolutionary effect on financial engineering. This is true in (at least) two respects. First, liquid credit derivatives permit stripping, pricing, and trading the last. major component in financial instruments, namely the credit risk. With credit derivatives, synthetics for almost any instrument can be built.' Second, and as important, is the special role played by. credit quants and financial engineers. Major broker dealers started organizing the credit market. after the development of major instruments such as options, swaps, constant maturity swaps, and swaptions was complete. New knowledge and skills were already in place. Credit markets were developed and instruments were structured using this expertise. At the end, most of the new innovations were put in place in credit markets and in structured credit. Hence, it is important to study the credit instruments, not only because they form a huge market but also because without them many. of the new financial engineering techniques would not be understood properly..  

Liquid credit derivative markets extend the creation of synthetics to assets with default risk. They. also permit pricing and trading default correlation. With credit default swaps (CDS) and the index. products, pricing default risk and default correlation is left to the markets. In contrast, traditional approach to credit risk uses ad hoc estimates of credit curves and tries to model the spread dynamics..  

This chapter deals with three sets of instruments. The first is the fundamental building block,. CDS. We will see that CDSs are a natural extension of liquid fixed-income instruments. Next, we. move to index products and their tranches. Tranche trading leads to calibration of default correla-. tion and has implications both for finance and for business cycle analysis. Finally, as the third component of credit markets we look at various structured credit products. Structured credit is one area. where new innovation takes place at a brisk rate. The chapter will also briefly review credit derivatives other than CDSs.  
