---
tags:
  - '#debt_management'
  - '#equity_swaps'
  - '#fund_management'
  - '#interest_rate_swaps'
  - '#regulatory_considerations'
  - '#swaps'
  - '#synthetic_positions'
  - '#tax_advantages'
  - '#total_return_swaps'
  - '#ucits_funds'
---
# 4.6 USES OF SWAPS  

The general idea involving the use of swaps in financial engineering is easy to summarize. A swap involves exchanges of cash flows. But cash flows are generated by assets, liabilities, and other commitments. This means that swaps are simply a standardized, liquid, and cost-effective alternative to trading cash assets. Instead of trading the cash asset or liability, we are simply trading the cash flows generated by it. Because swaps, in general, have zero value at the time of initiation, and are very liquid, this will indeed be a cost-effective alternative-hence their use in position taking, hedging, and risk management. What are these uses of swaps? We begin the discussion by looking at the uses of interest-rate swaps in this chapter. The uses of commodity, credit default, and FX swaps are somewhat different and we discuss their uses in detail in separate chapters on financial engineering applications to those asset classes. We will see that these swaps have convenient bal-. ance sheet implications. Regulatory and tax treatment of equity swaps are also relevant..  

# 4.6.1 USES OF EQUITY SWAPS  

Equity swaps illustrate the versatility of swap instruments.  

# 4.6.1.1 Fund management  

There is a huge industry of fund management where the fund manager tries to track some equity index. One way to do this is by buying the underlying portfolio of stocks that replicates the index and constantly readjusting it as the market moves, or as new funds are received, or paid by the fund. This is a fairly complex operation. Of course, one can use the S&P 500 futures to accomplish this. But futures contracts need to be rolled over and they require mark-to-market adjustments. Using equity swaps is a cost-effective alternative.  

The fund manager could enter into an equity swap using the S&P 500 in which the fund will pay, quarterly, a LIBOR-related rate and a (positive or negative) spread and receive the return on. the S&P 500 index for a period of. $n$ years.2  

The example below is similar to the one seen earlier in this chapter. Investors were looking fo. cost-effective ways to diversify their portfolios.  

# EXAMPLE  

In one equity swap, the holder of the instrument pays the total return on the S&P 500 and   
receives the return on the FTSE 100. Its advantage for the investor is the fact that, as a   
swap, it does not involve paying any up-front premium. The same position cannot be replicated by selling S&P stocks and buying FTSE 100   
Stocks.  

The second paragraph emphasizes one convenience of the equity swap. Because it is based directly on an index, equity-swap payoffs do not have any "tracking error."' On the other hand, the attempt to replicate an index using underlying stocks is bound to contain some replication error.  

# 4.6.1.2 Tax advantages  

Equity swaps are not only "cheaper' and more efficient ways of taking a position on indices, but may have some tax and ownership advantages as well. For example, if an investor wants to sell a stock that has appreciated significantly, then doing this through an outright sale will be subject to capital gains taxes. Instead, the investor can keep the stock, but, get into an equity swap where he or she pays the capital gains (losses) and dividends acquired from the stock, and receives some LIBOR-related return and a spread. This is equivalent to selling the stock and placing the received funds in an interbank deposit.  

# 4.6.1.3 Regulations  

Finally, equity swaps help in executing some strategies that otherwise may not be possible to implement due to regulatory considerations. In the following example, with the use of equity-swaps investment in an emerging market becomes feasible.  

# EXAMPLE  

Since the Kospi 200 futures were introduced foreign securities houses and investors have been frustrated by. the foreign investment limits placed on the instrument. They can only execute trades if they secure an. allotment of foreign open interest first, and any allotments secured are lost when the contract expires. Positions cannot be rolled over. Foreigners can only hold $15\%$ of the $^3$ month daily average of open interest, while individual investors with "Korean Investor IDs" are limited to $3\%$ . Recognizing the bottleneck, Korean securities houses such as Hyundai Securities have responded by offering foreign. participants equity swaps which are not limited by the restrictions.  

The structure is quite simple. A master swap agreement is established between the foreign client and an. offshore subsidiary or a special purpose vehicle of the Korean securities company. Under the master. agreement, foreigners execute equity swaps with the offshore entity which replicate the futures contract. Because the swap transactions involve two nonresident parties and are booked overseas, the foreign. investment limits cannot be applied.  

The Korean securities houses hedge the swaps in the futures market and book the trades in their proprietary. book. Obviously, as a resident entity, the foreign investment limits are not applied to the hedging trade. Once the master swap agreement is established, the foreign client can contact the Korean securities company directly in. Seoul, execute any number of trades, and have them booked and compiled against the master swap agreement.  

(Thomson Reuters IFR, January 27, 1996).  

The reading shows how restrictions on (1) ownership, (2) trading, and (3) rolling positions over can be handled using an equity swap. The reading also displays the structure of the equity swap that is put in place and some technical details associated with it..  

One of the strongest growth areas in the asset management industry has been the area of absolute return $\mathrm{UCITS}^{23}$ in Europe and $\cdot_{40}$ Act funds in the United States as hedge fund techniques area applied in more traditional fund vehicles.4 However, some of the techniques used to implement hedge fund techniques in these retail structures are designed to circumvent regulatory restrictions and have generated controversy as the following example shows.  

# EXAMPLE  

In recent years some fund management companies have launched UCITS funds that use alternative investment strategies typically found in hedge funds. Some funds have succeeded in circumventing UCITS restrictions on eligible assets by using total return swaps (TRS). Typically UCITS funds cannot hold  

commodity futures, for example, but some funds have used TRSs with banks in which the fund receives the. returns on a commodity futures in return for a swap rate paid to the bank counterparty. Some of the most. active users of TRS were Commodity Trading Advisors (CTAs) that sometimes used TRS to create the majority of the funds return. CTAs are alternative investment funds that use long and short positions in liquid futures markets across all asset classes to express their investment views. Other examples of TRS use included long/short equity funds that use TRS structures to create short exposures since physical shorting is not permitted in UCITS funds. Such total return swaps can be used not just to hold assets that are not normally eligible in UCITS structures but also to raise leverage beyond levels prescribed by UCITS regulation as the following example illustrates: The Dunn WMA Ucits Fund, for example, holds a total return swap on a proprietary index that can be up to 35 times leveraged. $I\cdot\cdot J$ Industry figures described this figure as "horrid" [Source: Financial Times 13/l1/2011]' Such UCITs funds are the exception but leverage levels of this magnitude are clearly not in the spirit of UCITS regulation..  

Although the majority of UCITS funds do not use such TRS structures, there is a fear that poor performance by a UCITS fund that uses such structures could tarnish the brand. This is of particular concern as a result of European attempts to sell UCITS structures in different Asian jurisdictions. Asian regulators can be expected to take a dim view of UCITS funds if they do not protect retail investors that they are typically marked to.  

(Source: Financial Times, 13/11/2011).2:  

One can distinguish two different types of total returns swaps. The first type is a so-called funded TRS, in which a fund, such as a UCITS fund, pays the swap counterparty, such as a bank, to finance. the swap. The fund receives collateral from the (bank) counterparty and if the collateral is less than the value of the swap this exposes the fund to counterparty risk. Such a structure can be used by UCITS funds for example that try to replicate a CTA strategy or index. The second type is an. unfunded swap, in which the assets are held by custodian. The custodian manages the payments between the counterparties. One counterparty can be a UCITS fund, for example, and the other a swap provider. The fund pays a fee or financing spread to compensate the swap provider for having to borrow to finance the swap. However, TRS are a rather imperfect way of replicating certain alternative investment strategies such as CTA or managed futures strategies as the following reading illustrates:  

Much of the expected tracking error in managed futures funds using a TRS is down to the additional costs imposed by the swaps, underlying hidden charges and [.Q.] administering a bespoke index (Source: Financial Times, 13/11/2011).26  

These issues raise the question whether TRS are a cost effective tool for long-term investors to achieve their investment objectives.  

# 4.6.1.4 Creating synthetic positions  

The following example is a good illustration of how equity swaps can be used to create synthetic positions.  

# EXAMPLE  

Equity derivative bankers have devised equity-swap trades to (handle) the regulations that prevent them from shorting shares in Taiwan, South Korea, and possibly Malaysia. The technique is not new but has reemerged as convertible bond (CB) issuance has picked up in the region, and especially in these three countries..  

Bankers have been selling equity swaps to CB arbitrageurs, who need to short the underlying shares but have been prohibited from doing so by local market regulations..  

It is more common for a CB trader to take a short equity-swap position with a natural holder of the. stock. The stockholder will swap his long stock position for a long equity-swap position. This provides the CB trader with more flexibility to trade the physical shares. When the swap matures-usually 1 year later-. the shares are returned to the institution and the swap is settled for cash..  

(Thomson Reuters IFR, December 5, 2001).  

In this example, a CB trader needs to short a security by an amount that changes continuously.27 A convenient way to handle such operations is for the CB trader to write an equity swap that pays the equity returns to an investor and gets the investors' physical shares to do the hedging.  

# 4.6.1.5 Stripping credit risk  

Suppose we would like to strip the credit risk implicit in a defaultable coupon bond. Note that the main problem is that the bond yield will depend on two risks. First is the credit spread and second is the interest-rate risk. An asset swap, where we pay a fixed swap rate and receive LIBOR, will then eliminate the interest-rate risk in the bond. The result is called asset swap spread.  

# 4.6.2 USING INTEREST-RATE AND OTHER SWAPS  

Interest-rate swaps play a much more fundamental role than equity swaps. In fact, all swaps can be used in balance sheet management. Balance sheets contain several cash flows; using the swap, one can switch these cash flow characteristics. Swaps are used in hedging. They have zero value at time of initiation and hence don't require any funding. A market practitioner can easily cover his positions in equity, commodities, and fixed income by quickly arranging proper swaps and then unwind these positions when there is no need for the hedge.  

Finally, swaps are also trading instruments. In fact, one can construct spread trades most conve. niently by using various types of swaps. Some possible spread trades are given by the following:  

Pay $n$ -period fixed rate $s_{t_{0}}$ and receive floating LIBOR with notional amount $N$ Pay $L_{t_{i}}$ and receive $r_{t_{i}}$ both floating rates, in the same currency. This is a basis swap. Pay and receive two floating rates in different currencies. This will be a currency swap.  

As these examples show, swaps can pretty much turn every interesting instrument into some sort of "spread product." This will reduce the underlying credit risks, make the value of the swap. zero at initiation, and, if properly designed, make the position relatively easy to value..  

# 4.6.3 TWO USES OF INTEREST-RATE SWAPS  

We now consider two examples of the use of interest-rate swaps.  

# 4.6.3.1 Changing portfolio duration  

As we saw in the previous chapter, duration is the "average"' maturity of a fixed-income portfolio..   
It turns out that in general the largest fixed-income liabilities are managed by governments, due to.   
the existence of government debt. Depending on market conditions, governments may want to.   
adjust the average maturity of their debt. Swaps can be very useful here. The following example illustrates this point.  

# EXAMPLE  

France and Germany are preparing to join Italy in using interest-rate swaps to manage their debt. Swaps.   
can be used to adjust debt duration and reduce interest-rate costs, but government trading of over-the-.   
counter derivatives could distort spreads and tempt banks to front-run sovereign positions. The United States.   
and United Kingdom say they have no plans to use swaps to manage domestic debt.. As much as E150 billion of swap use by France is possible over the next couple of years, though the.   
actual figure could be much less, according to an official at the French debt management agency. That is   
the amount that would be needed if we were to rely on only swaps to bring about "a [significant] shortening.   
of the average duration of our debt," an official said. France has E644.8 billion of debt outstanding, with an.   
average maturity of 6 years and 73 days.. The official said decisions would be made in September about how to handle actual swap transactions.   
"If E150 billion was suddenly spread in the market, it could produce an awful mess," he said. (Thomson Reuters IFR, Issue 1392).  

Using swap instruments, similar adjustments to the duration of liabilities can routinely be made by corporations as well.  

How can measures of interest-rate risk such as Dv01 and duration discussed in the previous chapter be applied to swaps? In principle, the Dv01 of receiving fixed in a fixed-for-floating interest-rate swap is equal to the Dv01 of its fixed leg minus the Dv01 of its floating leg. Thus the duration of a swap can be calculated like that of a fixed and a floating rate bond. However, for practical purposes, this is not very useful since the different legs of the swap are exposed to movements in different parts of the term structure of interest rates. The floating leg is more exposed to movements in long-term interest rates while the short leg is exposed to movements in the short leg. Therefore, market participants in practice use different approaches to hedge the short and the long legs of the swap. These more advanced methodological approaches involve multifactor risk metrics and address the weakness resulting from our assumption in the previous chapter that movements in the entire term structure can be described by one interest-rate factor.  

# 4.6.3.2 Using swaps to reduce a country's debt level  

Although governments oftentimes fret about the use of swaps by companies, sometimes govern-. ments use swaps to achieve their own objectives. Italy and Greece, for example, were two countries  

that used swaps to mask and reduce their debt levels in the run-up to their membership of the European Monetary Union.  

# EXAMPLE  

The Goldman Sachs transaction swapped debt issued by Greece in dollars and yen for euros using an   
historical exchange rate, a mechanism that implied a reduction in debt, Sardelis said. It also used an off  
market interest-rate swap to repay the loan. Those swaps allow counterparties to exchange two forms of   
interest payment, such as fixed or floating rates, referenced to a notional amount of debt. The trading costs on the swap rose because the deal had a notional value of more than 15 billion euros, nore than the amount of the loan itself, said a former Greek official with knowledge of the transaction who   
asked not to be identified because the pricing was private. The size and complexity of the deal meant that   
Goldman Sachs charged proportionately higher trading fees than for deals of a more standard size and   
structure, he said. It looks like an extremely profitable transaction for Goldman," said Saul Haydon Rowe, a partner in   
Devon Capital LLP, a London-based firm that advises global investors on derivatives disputes. Cross-currency swaps are contracts borrowers use to convert foreign currency debt into a domestic  
currency obligation using the market exchange rate. As first reported in 2003, Goldman Sachs used a   
fictitious, historical exchange rate in the swaps to make about $2\%$ of Greece's debt disappear from its.   
national accounts. To repay the 2.8 billion euros it borrowed from the bank, Greece entered into a separate   
swap contract tied to interest-rate swings.. Falling bond yields caused that bet to sour, and tweaks to the deal failed to prevent the debt from almost   
doubling in size by the time the swap was restructured in August 2005. Greece, which last month secured a second, 130 billion-euro bailout, is sitting on debt equal to about 60% of its GDP as of last year.  

(Source: Bloomberg, 6 March 2012).2  

# 4.6.3.3 Technical uses  

Swaps have technical uses. The following example shows that they can be utilized in designing new bond futures contracts where the delivery is tied not to bonds, but to swaps.  

# EXAMPLE  

LIFFE is to launch its swap-based LIBOR Financed Bond on October 18. Both contracts are designed to avoid the severe squeeze that has afflicted the Deutsche Terminboerse Bund future in recent weeks.   
LIFFE's new contract differs from the traditional bond future in that it is swap-referenced rather than bond-referenced. Instead of being settled by delivery of cash bonds chosen from a delivery basket, the. LIBOR Financed Bond is linked to the International Swap and Derivatives Association benchmark swap rate. At expiry, the contract is cash-settled with reference to this swap rate..   
Being cash-settled, the Liffe contract avoids the possibility of a short squeeze-where the price of the cheapest to deliver bond is driven up as the settlement day approaches. And being referenced to a swap curve rather than a bond basket, the contract eliminates any convexity and duration risk. The LIBOR. Financed Bond replicates the convexity of a comparable swap position and therefore reduces the basis risk. resulting from hedging with cash bonds or bond futures. An exchange-based contender for benchmark status, the DTB Bund, has drawn fire in recent weeks   
following a short squeeze in the September expiry. In the week before, the gross basis between the cheapest   
to deliver Bund and the Bund future was driven down to -3.5.. The squeeze had been driven by a flight to quality on the back of the emerging market crisis. Open   
interest in the Bund future is above 600,000 contracts or DM15 billion. In contrast, the total deliverable   
basket for German government bonds is roughly DM74 billion and the cheapest to deliver account to   
DM30 billion. Officials from the DTB have always contended that there will be no lack of deliverable Bunds. They   
claim actual delivery has only been made in about. $4\%$ of open positions in the past (Thomson Reuters IFR Issue 1327).  

In fact, several new cash-settled futures contracts were recently introduced by LIFFE and CME on swaps. CME launched EUR-denominated deliverable interest-rate swap futures (Euro DSF) on April 14, 2014.29 Swaps are used as the underlying instrument. Without the existence of liquid swap markets, a swap futures contract would have no such reference point and would have to be referenced to a bond basket.  
