# 18.10 AMERICAN FUTURES OPTIONS vs. AMERICAN SPOT OPTIONS  

Traded futures options are in practice usually American. Assuming that the risk-free rate of interest, $r$ is positive, there is always some chance that it will be optimal to exercise an American futures option early. American futures options are therefore worth more than their European counterparts.  

It is not generally true that an American futures option is worth the same as the corresponding American spot option when the futures and options contracts have the same maturity.' Suppose, for example, that there is a normal market with futures prices. consistently higher than spot prices prior to maturity. An American futures call option must be worth more than the corresponding American spot call option. The reason is that in some situations the futures option will be exercised early, in which case it will provide a greater profit to the holder. Similarly, an American futures put option must be worth less than the corresponding American spot put option. If there is an inverted market with futures prices consistently lower than spot prices, the reverse must be true. American futures call options are worth less than the corresponding American spot call option, whereas American futures put options are worth more than the corresponding. American spot put option.  

The differences just described between American futures options and American spot. options hold true when the futures contract expires later than the options contract as. well as when the two expire at the same time. In fact, the later the futures contract expires the greater the differences tend to be..  
