# 17.1 INTRODUCTION  

In the previous chapters, we discussed convexity and options as well as their applications in the form. of volatility trading. The US mortgage market provides us with another application of a long con-. vexity position as a result of the prepayment option of US homeowners. We carefully explain the value of the prepayment option and its effect on mortgage agencies and discuss potential approaches to hedge this risk. As we will see the structure of the US mortgage market and the presence of a mortgage prepayment option, in particular, leads to optionality and convexity in payoffs.  

Swap markets rank among the world's largest in notional amount and are among the most liquid. The same is true for swaption markets. Why is this so?.  

There are many uses for swaps. Borrowers "arbitrage" credit spreads and borrow in currencies that yield the lowest all-in-cost. This, in general, implies borrowing in a currency other than the one the borrower needs. The proceeds, therefore, need to be swapped into the needed currency. Theoretically, this operation can be done by using a single currency swap where floating rates in different currencies are exchanged. Currency swaps discussed in Chapter 6 are not interest rate swaps, but the operation would involve vanilla interest swaps as well. Most issuers would like to pay a fixed long-term coupon. Thus, the process of swapping the proceeds into a different currency requires, first, swapping the fixed coupon payments into floating in the same currency, and then, through currency swaps, exchanging the floating rate cash flows. Once the floating rate payments in the desired currency are established, these can be further swapped into fixed payments in the same currency. Thus, a new issue requires the use of two plain vanilla interest rate swaps in different currencies coupled with a vanilla currency swap. Hence, new bond issues are one source of liquidity for vanilla interest rate swaps.  

Balance sheet management of interest exposure is another reason for the high liquidity of swaps. The asset and liability interest rate exposure of financial institutions can be adjusted using interest rate swaps and swaptions. If a loan is obtained in floating rates and on-lent in fixed rate, then an interest rate swap can be entered into and the exposures can be efficiently managed. FRAs, swaps, caps, floors and swaptions are traded on many liquid currencies and their existence in these countries is not chiefly driven by mortgage market driven.  

In some countries and cases, the uses of swap markets can be matched by the needs of mortgagebased activity. It appears that a major part of the swaption and a significant portion of plain vanilla swap trading in the US are due to the requirements of the mortgage-based financial strategies. In this chapter we focus on the US mortgage market for the purpose of illustrating the link between option markets and the market for the underlying. Mortgages have prepayment clauses and this introduces convexities in banks' fixed-income portfolios. This convexity can be hedged using swaptions, which creates liquidity in the swaption market. On the other hand, swaptions are positions that need to be dynamically hedged. This hedging can be done with forward swaps as the underlying. This leads to further swap trading.. Mortgage markets are huge and this activity can sometimes dominate the swap and swaption markets.  

In this chapter, we use the mortgage sector as an example to study the financial engineering of swaptions. We use this to introduce caps/floors and swaptions. The chapter also presents a simple discussion of the swap measure. This constitutes another example of measure change technology introduced in Chapter 12 and further discussed in Chapters 13 and 14. This chapter provides an example that puts together most of the tools used throughout the text. We start by first reviewing the essentials of the mortgage sector.  
