---
tags:
  - fannie_mae
  - mbs
  - mortgage_backed_securities
  - mortgage_market
  - pass_through_certificates
aliases:
  - mbs market
  - mortgage securities
key_concepts:
  - Book-entry certificates
  - Fannie Mae servicing fee
  - 'MBS: underlying asset'
  - Pass-through rate
  - Pro-rata cash flow share
---

# 17.5 MORTGAGE-BASED SECURITIES  

MBS is a very important market, especially in the United States. MBS is also called "mortgage.   
pass-through certificates.' They essentially take the cash flows involving interest and amortization.   
of a principal paid by home buyers, and then pass them through to an investor who buys the MBS.   
In MBS, a selected pool of mortgages serves as the underlying asset. An MBS investor receives a "pro-rata share of the cash flows" generated by the underlying mortgages.  

# EXAMPLE  

A typical Fannie Mae MBS will have the following characteristics.  

Each pool of mortgages has a pass-through rate, which forms the coupon passed on to the. investor. This is done on the 25th day of a month following the month of the initial issue.  

The pass-through rate is lower than the interest rate on the underlying mortgages in the pool. (We assumed this away in the present chapter.)  

This interest differential covers the fee paid to Fannie Mae, and the fee paid to the servic ing institution for collecting payments from homeowners and performing other servicing functions.  

The lender that delivers the mortgages for securitization can retain servicing of the loans.  

During pooling, Fannie Mae makes sure that the mortgage rates on the underlying loans fall within 250 basis points of each other.  

MBSs are sold to investors through securities dealers.  

Certificates are issued in book-entry form and are paid by wire transfer.  

Fannie Mae's paying agent is the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The centralized payment simplifies accounting procedures since investors receive just one monthly payment for various MBSs that they hold..  

The certificates will initially represent a minimum of $\$1000$ of the unpaid principal of the pooled mortgages. However, as time passes, this principal is paid gradually due to amortization and the remaining principal may go down.  

Such activity by Fannie Mae-type institutions has several important consequences. First of all,. the MBS and the Fannie Mae agency securities are issued in large sizes and normally form a liquid. asset class. Further, the MBS and some of the agency securities contain implicit call and put options, and this creates a large class of convex assets. Important hedging, arbitraging, and pricing issues emerge. Second, institutions such as Fannie Mae become huge players in derivatives markets. which affect the liquidity and functioning of swap, swaption, and other interest rate option markets. Third, the issue of prepayment requires special attention from the part of market participants.. Fourth, as institutions such as Fannie Mae bear the credit risk in the mortgages, they separate credit risk from market risk of mortgages. The credit crisis of 2007-2008 has shown that there is a deli-. cate pricing issue here. It is difficult to estimate this credit risk. We will deal with the issue of credit risk in subsequent chapters. Finally, the structure of the balance sheets and the federal government connection that such institutions have may create market gyrations from time to time.  
