---
tags:
  - '#arbitrage_free_pricing'
  - '#discount_bond_prices'
  - '#forward_rates'
  - '#fra_markets'
  - '#libor'
  - '#ois'
  - '#swap_curve'
  - '#swap_rates'
  - '#term_structure_modeling'
  - '#yield_curve_construction'
---
# 14.3 TERM STRUCTURE MODELING  

The framework outlined in this chapter demonstrates the links between swap, bond, and FRA mar-. kets. We will now discuss the term structure implications of the derived formulas. The set of formulas we studied implies that, given the necessary information from two of these markets, we can,. in principle, obtain arbitrage-free prices for the remaining market.1o we discuss this briefly, after. noting the following small, but significant, modification. Term structure models concern forward rates as well as spot rates. As a matter of fact, traditional yield curve construction is done by first. obtaining the spot yields and then moving to forward rates..  

Following this tradition, and noting that spot swaps are more liquid than forward swaps, in this section we let $s_{t_{0}}^{n}$ denote the spot swap rate with maturity $n$ years. Without loss of generality, we can assume that swap maturities are across years $n=1,....,30$ , so that the longest dated swap is for 30 years.'l The discussion will be conducted in terms of spot swap rates.  

# 14.3.1 DETERMINING THE FORWARD RATES FROM SWAPS  

Given a sufficient number of arbitrage-free values of observed spot swap rates $\left\{s_{t_{0}}^{n}\right\}$ and using the equalities  

$$
s_{t_{0}}^{n}=\frac{\sum_{i=0}^{n-1}B(t_{0},t_{i+1})F(t_{0},t_{i})}{\sum_{i=0}^{n-1}B(t_{0},t_{i+1})}
$$  

and  

$$
\frac{B(t_{0},t_{i})}{B(t_{0},t_{i+1})}=(1+\delta F(t_{0},t_{i}))
$$  

We can obtain all forward rates, for the case $\delta=1$ . By substituting the $B(t_{0},t_{i})$ out from the first set of equations, we obtain $n$ equations in $n$ forward rates.12 In the case of $\delta=1/4$ or $\delta=1/2$ , there are more unknown $\boldsymbol{F}(t_{0},t_{i})$ than equations, if traded swap maturities are in years. Under these conditions, the $t_{i}$ would run over quarters whereas the superscript in $s_{t_{0}}^{n}$ $n=1$ , 2, ... will be in years. This is due to the fact that swap rates are quoted for annual intervals, whereas the settlement dates would be quarterly or semiannual. Some type of interpolation of swap rates or modeling will be required, which is common even in traditional yield curve calculations.  

# 14.3.2 DETERMINING THE $B(t_{0},t_{i})$ FROM FORWARD RATES  

Now, if the forward rates $\{F(t_{0},t_{i})\}$ and the current LIBOR curve are provided by markets or are obtained from $\{s_{t_{0}}^{n}\}$ as in our case, we can use the formula  

$$
B(t_{0},t_{i+1})=\frac{1}{\prod_{j=0}^{i}(1+\delta F(t_{0},t_{j}))}
$$  

to calculate the arbitrage-free values of the relevant pure discount bond prices. In each case, we can derive the values of $B(t_{0},t_{i})$ from the observed $\{F(t_{0},t_{\mathrm{i}})\}$ and $\textstyle\left\{s_{t_{0}}^{n}\right\}$ . This procedure would price the FRAs and bonds off the swap markets. It is called the curve algorithm..  

# 14.3.3 DETERMINING THE SWAP RATE  

We can proceed in the opposite direction as well. Given arbitrage-free values of forward rates, we can, in principle, use the same formulas to determine the swap rates. All we need to do is (i) calculate the discount bond prices from the forward rates and (ii) substitute these bond prices and the appropriate forward rates in our formula:  

$$
s_{t_{0}}^{n}=\frac{\sum_{i=0}^{n-1}B(t_{0},t_{i+1})F(t_{0},t_{i})}{\sum_{i=0}^{n-1}B(t_{0},t_{i+1})}
$$  

Repeating this for all available $s_{t_{0}}^{n}$ $,n=1,...,30$ , we obtain the arbitrage-free swap curve and discounts. In this case, we would be going from the spot and forward LIBOR curve to the (spot) swap curve.  

# 14.3.4 REAL-WORLD COMPLICATIONS  

There are, of course, several real-world complications to going back and forth between the forward rates, discount bond prices, and swap rates. Let us mention three of these. First, as mentioned in the previous section, in reality swaps are traded for yearly intervals and the FRAs or Eurodollar contracts are traded for 3-month or 6-month tenors. This means that if we desired to go from swap quotes to quotes on forward rates using these formulas, there will be the need to interpolate the swap rates for portions of a year.  

Second, observed quotes on forward rates do not necessarily come from paid-in-arrears FRAs.. Market-traded FRAs settle at the time the LIBOR rate is observed, not at the end of the relevant period. The FRA rates generated by these markets will be consistent with the formulas introduced earlier. On the other hand, some traders use interest rate futures, and, specifically, Eurocurrency. futures, in hedging their swap books. Futures markets are more transparent than the FRA markets. and have a great deal of liquidity. But the forward rates determined in futures markets require convexity adjustments before they can be used in the swap formulas discussed in this chapter..  

Third, the liquidity of FRA and swap rates depends on the maturity under consideration.. As mentioned earlier, FRAs are more liquid for the shorter end of the curve, whereas swaps are more liquid at the longer end. This means that it may not be possible to go from FRA rates to swap. rates for maturities over 5 years. Similarly, for very short maturities there will be no observed quotes for swaps.  

# 14.3.4.1 Remark  

Another important point needs to be mentioned here. In this chapter, for simplicity, our treatment has followed the pre-GFC convention in academic work of using the term "LIBOR"' as if it relates to a default-free loan. In practice, LIBOR rates $L_{t_{i}}$ are not risk free. Admittedly, this was implicit in the fixing process of the LIBOR rate. The banks that contributed to the rate had, in general, ratings of AA or $\mathrm{AA-}$ , and the interest rate that they paid reflected this level of credit risk. However, the probability of such highly rated banks defaulting was considered small and therefore market participants and academics considered LIBOR a reasonable proxy for the risk-free rate. Before the GFC, LIBOR was a key indicator of what banks were willing to lend to each other, and 3-month LIBOR in particular emerged as a key benchmark in the interest rate swaps market. As discussed in Chapter 3 during the GFC, the LIBOR rate rose dramatically and diverged from the OIS as fears of counter-party risk became acute. This led to the realization that LIBOR could not be used as a measure of the risk-free rate. Following the GFC, market participants started using the OIS as the discount rate for the pricing of (collateralized) interest rate swaps. In June 2010, LCH.Clearnet announced that it would use the OIS instead of LIBOR to discount its $\$218$ trillion interest rate swap portfolio. The intuition is that in fully collateralized swaps, financial counterparties are exposed to overnight risk to other financial counterparties only and not the risk of the full term of a particular loan or instrument. Academic models have been developed to incorporate credit and counter-party risk more explicitly into derivatives pricing models. Such models and recent market practice are discussed in detail in Chapter 24.  

Thus, if a financial engineer follows the procedures described here, the resulting curve will be the swap curve and not the treasury or sovereign curve. This swap curve will be "above' the sover-. eign or treasury curve, and the difference will be the curve for the swap spreads..  
