# 10.11 WARRANTS, EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTIONS, AND CONVERTIBLES  

Warrants are options issued by a financial institution or nonfinancial corporation. For. example, a financial institution might issue 1 million put warrants on gold, each. warrant giving the holder the right to sell 10 ounces of gold for. $\$1,000$ per ounce. It could then proceed to create a market for the warrants. To exercise the warrant, the holder would contact the financial institution. A common use of warrants by a nonfinancial corporation is at the time of a bond issue. The corporation issues call warrants giving the holder the right to buy its own stock for a certain price at a certain future time and then attaches them to the bonds to make the bonds more attractive to investors.  

Employee stock options are call options issued to employees by their company to. motivate them to act in the best interests of the company's shareholders (see Chap-. ter 16). They are usually at the money at the time of issue. Accounting standards now. require them to be expensed at fair market value on the income statement of the company.  

Convertible bonds, often referred to as convertibles, are bonds issued by a company that can be converted into equity at certain times using a predetermined exchange ratio. They are therefore bonds with an embedded call option on the company's stock.  

One feature of warrants, employee stock options, and convertibles is that a pre-. determined number of options are issued. By contrast, the number of options on a particular stock that trade on the CBOE or another exchange is not predetermined. (As people take positions in a particular option series, the number of options outstanding increases; as people close out positions, it declines.) Warrants issued by a company on its own stock, employee stock options, and convertibles are different from exchangetraded options in another important way. When these instruments are exercised, the company issues more shares of its own stock and sells them to the option holder for the strike price. The exercise of the instruments therefore leads to an increase in the number of shares of the company's stock that are outstanding. By contrast, when an exchange-. traded call option is exercised, the party with the short position buys in the market shares that have already been issued and sells them to the party with the long position for the strike price. The company whose stock underlies the option is not involved in any way.  
