# 5.7 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN REPO MARKETS AND THE IMPACT OF THE GFC  

The institutional structure of the repo market had an important effect on the financial system and financial markets in different countries during the GFC. In the United States, both the bilateral and tri-party repo markets experienced runs. The demise of Lehman Brothers was accelerated when creditors in the tri-party repo market refused to extend repo financing to the bank, since they were concerned about the creditworthiness and counterparty risk of Lehman Brothers. The bilateral repo market for different asset classes experienced a different kind of run during the GFC as collateral buyers increased haircuts, thus forcing some collateral sellers to liquidate assets.13 Financial engineers and traders need to take such potential runs into account when designing products and risk. managing their positions.  

The GFC did not just have a differential impact on different types of repo markets in the United States, but there were also differences between continents due to different institutional arrangements. The majority of euro repo transactions are conducted in the interbank market which is due to the fact that banks play a dominate role in the provision of capital in Europe.14 Moreover, more than $60\%$ of the interbank repo transactions in the euro area are conducted via central counter parties (CCP). Repos involving standard securities such as government bonds or other relatively safe securities are typically executed via CCP. The difference between CCP and non-CCP repos is that non-CCP repos typically involve less standard securities as collateral and more bespoke contract terms. Trading in the CCP-based segment of the euro interbank repo market was resilient during the GFC. Repo volume, risk premiums, and lengths of average term repos were not adversely affected for repos that were conducted via CCPs. Two of the reasons for the greater stability of the CCP-based euro interbank repo market were probably the anonymous electronic trading and the reliance on safe collateral. Whereas the CCP-based repo market fared well, the non-CCP-based euro interbank repo market experienced similar difficulties similar to those of the US repo market during the GFC. This episode highlights the importance of repo markets and their institutional structure for financial markets and financial engineering applications..  
