---
tags:
  - '#delta_gamma_vega'
  - '#exchange_rate'
  - '#financial_institutions'
  - '#greek_letters'
  - '#implied_volatility'
  - '#option_trading'
  - '#portfolio_management'
  - '#risk_management'
  - '#scenario_analysis'
---
# 19.11 SCENARIO ANALYSIS  

In addition to monitoring risks such as delta, gamma, and vega, option traders often also carry out a scenario analysis. The analysis involves calculating the gain or loss on their portfolio over a specified period under a variety of different scenarios. The time period chosen is likely to depend on the liquidity of the instruments. The scenarios can be either chosen by management or generated by a model.  

Consider a bank with a portfolio of options dependent on the USD/EUR exchange rate. The two key variables on which the value of the portfolio depends are the exchange rate and the exchange rate volatility. The bank could calculate a table such as Table 19.5 showing the profit or loss experienced during a 2-week period under different scenarios. This table considers seven different exchange rate movements and three different implied volatility movements. The table makes the simplifying assumption that the implied volatilities of all options in the portfolio change by the same amount. (Note: $+2\%$ would indicate a volatility change from $10\%$ to $12\%$ , not $10\%$ to $10.2\%$  

In a typical arrangement at a financial institution, the responsibility for a portfolio of. derivatives dependent on a particular underlying asset is assigned to one trader or to a group of traders working together. For example, one trader at Goldman Sachs might be assigned responsibility for all derivatives dependent on the value of the Australian dollar. A computer system calculates the value of the portfolio and Greek. letters for the portfolio. Limits are defined for each Greek letter and special permission is required if a trader wants to exceed a limit at the end of a trading day..  

The delta limit is often expressed as the equivalent maximum position in the underlying asset. For example, the delta limit for a stock at a particular bank might be $\$1$ million. If the stock price is $\$50$ , this means that the absolute value of delta as we have calculated it can be no more than 20,000. The vega limit is usually expressed as a maximum dollar exposure per $1\%$ change in implied volatilities.  

As a matter of course, options traders make themselves delta neutral--or close to delta neutral--at the end of each day. Gamma and vega are monitored, but are not usually managed on a daily basis. Financial institutions often find that their business with clients involves writing options and that as a result they accumulate negative gamma and vega. They are then always looking out for opportunities to manage their gamma and vega risks by buying options at competitive prices.  

There is one aspect of an options portfolio that mitigates problems of managing gamma and vega somewhat. Options are often close to the money when they are first sold, so that they have relatively high gammas and vegas. But after some time has elapsed, the underlying asset price has often changed enough for them to become deep out of the money or deep in the money. Their gammas and vegas are then very small and of little consequence. A nightmare scenario for an options trader is where written options remain very close to the money as the maturity date is approached.  

In Table 19.5, the greatest loss is in the lower right corner of the table. The loss corresponds to implied volatilities increasing by $2\%$ and the exchange rate moving up by 0.06. Usually the greatest loss in a table such as Table 19.5 occurs at one of the corners, but this is not always so. Consider, for example, the situation where a bank's portfolio consists of a short position in a butterfly spread (see Section 12.3). The greatest loss will be experienced if the exchange rate stays where it is.  

Business Snapshot 19.1 Dynamic Hedging in Practice   
Table 19.5 Profit or loss realized in 2 weeks under different scenarios ( $\S$ million).   


<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Implied volatility changes</td><td colspan="7">Exchange rate change</td></tr><tr><td>-0.06</td><td>-0.04</td><td>-0.02</td><td>0.00</td><td>+0.02</td><td>+0.04</td><td>+0.06</td></tr><tr><td>-2%</td><td>+102</td><td>+55</td><td>+25</td><td>+6</td><td>-10</td><td>-34</td><td>-80</td></tr><tr><td>0%</td><td>+80</td><td>+40</td><td>+17</td><td>+2</td><td>-14</td><td>-38</td><td>-85</td></tr><tr><td>+2%</td><td>+60</td><td>+25</td><td>+9</td><td>-2</td><td>-18</td><td>-42</td><td>-90</td></tr></table></body></html>  
