# Basic Concepts in Valuing Risky Assets and Derivatives  

some basic principles that comprise the foundation for valuing assets, after which we will extend those principles to valuing financial derivatives, especially options. A more rigorous foundation for these results is found in most classic works on the theory of finance, such as Fama (1976), Fama and Miller (1972), Huang and Litzenberger (1988), Ingersoll (1987), and Jarrow (1988).  

# 6.1 VALUING RISKY ASSETS  

Suppose there is an asset that will have a value of either 100 if a good economy occurs or 50 if a bad economy occurs one period later. The risk-free interest rate, $r_{\mathrm{:}}$ , for the period is $5\%$ . Further, suppose we somehow know the probability of the good economy is $60\%$ , and the probability of the bad economy is $40\%$ . What should be the current price of the asset?  

First, we have to start by finding the expected value of the asset, $E(S_{1})$ , one period later:  

$$
E(S_{1})=\S100(0.6)+\S50(0.4)=\S80.
$$  

An investor who is indifferent to risk, referred to as being risk neutral, would value the asset $(S_{0})$ at  

$$
S_{0}={\frac{E(S_{1})}{1+r}}={\frac{\S80}{1.05}}=\S76.19.
$$  

Let us denote this risk-neutral investor simply RNI. If RNI made this investment many times over, they would receive an average payoff of 80. If they paid 76.19 each time, they would effectively break even, being paid only a $5\%$ return to be compensated for the time value of money. The distinguishing characteristic of RNI investors is that they do not demand compensation for the risk. They are perfectly happy to make a certain amount of money one time and lose that same amount of money another time. Over the long run, their offsetting gains and losses leave them as content as they were before they made the investments. They earn the risk-free rate in spite of assuming risk.  

A risk-averse investor, identified as RAI, however, would not be satisfied to make an investment many times and earn an average return that compensates only for the time value of money. If RAI made an investment that earned $x\%$ one time and lost $x\%$ another time, RAI would wish the investment had not been made at all. The dissatisfaction from the loss is more painful than the satisfaction of a gain of equivalent magnitude. As such, an RAI would pay less than 76.19. In that case, in the long run the gains would offset the losses by more than the risk-free rate. The important question is, how much less would an RAI pay? The answer depends on how the RAI addresses risk. The more risk averse they are, the less they would pay. Thus, the more risk averse they are, the more they will discount the expected value to obtain the price they will pay. People vary in their degrees of risk aversion. Some are highly risk averse and some only moderately risk averse. A given person may also vary in their risk aversion, based on their stage of life or accumulated wealth.  

Let us assume that the investor believes a price of 70 would be appropriate. What does this imply about their risk aversion? At a price of 70, they have an expected return of  

$$
{\frac{80}{70}}-1=0.1429.
$$  

Thus, their expected return is $14.29\%$ . If they make this investment many times, they will earn on average $14.29\%$ . Given a $5\%$ risk-free rate, they will earn a risk premium of $9.29\%$ $(=14.29\%-5\%)$ . Thus, they are pricing the investment such that they expect a $9.29\%$ risk premium. Of course, they may make the investment only one time, in which case they will either earn $100-70=30$ , which is $42.9\%$ $(=30/70)$ , or lose $70-50=20\$ , which is $-28.6\%$ $(=-20/70)$ . Note that the probability-weighted average of $42.9\%$ and $-28.6\%$ is $14.29\%$ :1  

$$
(30/70)(0.6)+(-20/70)(0.4)=0.1429.
$$  

Or they might make the investment only a few times and make or lose an average of some value other than the expected return of $14.29\%$ . But their long-run expectation is to earn a return of $14.29\%$ , and this rate will compensate them for taking the risk, based on their pricing the investment at 70.  

# 6.2 RISK-NEUTRAL PRICING IN DISCRETE TIME  

One of the most important results derived from option pricing theory is that all assets can be valued via a risk neutrality argument. Unfortunately, risk-neutral pricing has been a source of much confusion. Those who do not understand the process are led to believe that some mysterious sleight of hand has been done and that the resulting price is somehow tainted by ignoring the risk. In fact, risk-neutral pricing makes no such assumption of risk neutrality. It simply uses the assumption that no arbitrage opportunities exist rather than the assumption that investors are risk averse to motivate the pricing process.  

The point is most easily made in a simple model in which a risky asset has two future outcomes. The outcomes themselves are known, but we do not know which will occur. We can assign probabilities, though as we will show later, these probabilities are not required for risk-neutral pricing. This type of framework, in which an asset has two possible future outcomes, is sometimes called a two-state model but more often called a binomial model. On the surface it seems that this model oversimplifies things. Naturally in the real world, there are more than two future outcomes. That problem can be easily accommodated by allowing multiple time periods such that each realized outcome is followed by two more possible outcomes, and so forth. But more fundamentally, a binomial framework permits a simplified but powerful accommodation of uncertainty. As long as we acknowledge that we do not know which outcome will occur, we have built uncertainty into the model.  

Consider an asset currently priced at $s$ whose price one period later can be $S u$ with probability $q$ or $s d$ with probability $1-q$ . The factors $u$ and $d$ represent one plus the percentage change in the asset price. Let us first consider how that asset would be priced in a world of risk-averse investors. Under risk aversion, any risky asset is priced as the discounted value of its expected future price. The expected future price of the asset is $q S u+(1-q)S d$ . Consequently, the current price would be given as  

$$
S=\frac{q S u+(1-q)S d}{1+k_{R}},
$$  

where $k_{R}$ is the discount rate that reflects an adjustment for risk. For risk-averse investors, the discount rate will consist of the risk-free rate, $r_{:}$ , plus a risk premium. The rate $k_{R}$ is sometimes considered as having arisen out of an asset’s covariance with the market, such as in the capital asset pricing model (recall denoted CAPM), or some alternative model of market equilibrium, but it is not necessary to assume any such type of equilibrium. It can simply be a subjective estimate of the premium a risk-averse investor expects to earn. For a risk-neutral investor, the discount rate will be the risk-free rate.  

Given knowledge of $s,u.$ , and $d$ , let us restate the price of the asset in the following manner: First, we ask if there are probability values that can be substituted for $q$ and $1-q$ that permit us to change $k_{R}$ to the risk-free rate, $r_{\mathrm{:}}$ , while keeping the price exactly as it was. In the absence of arbitrage, the answer is yes, as we demonstrate next.  

Consider a world of two assets: the stock and a risk-free bond. Now let us assume that $d>1+r$ . In other words, the worst return on the stock is better than the risk-free interest rate. It would not take a genius to figure out that one could borrow money to pay the price of the stock at the risk-free rate, buy the stock, and then merely wait on the outcome. If the stock goes to $S u$ , that is enough money to pay back the loan $S(1+r)$ and would leave $S u-S(1+r)=S[u-(1+r)]$ , which is positive. If $d>1+r$ , then, if the worst-case outcome occurs, the investor will have $S d-S(1+r)=S[d-(1+r)]$ . Again, we assumed $d>1+r$ , so this outcome is positive. In simple terms, if the worst outcome of the stock is better than the risk-free rate, an arbitrage profit is available. Clearly investors would take advantage of this situation, and their trading activity would likely adjust the stock price. With this new adjusted stock price $\boldsymbol{u}$ and $d$ would change until there is no arbitrage profit available. And naturally, we could not have the risk-free rate exceed the up return, $u-1$ , on the stock, for in that case no one would buy the stock, so its value would be zero. So ultimately it must be that $u>1+r>d$ .2  

Given that $u>1+r>d$ , we will now demonstrate that it is possible to find weights that we will identify as $\phi$ (lowercase Greek letter, pronounced $^{\mathrm{\infty}}\mathrm{phi}^{\mathrm{\infty}})$ and $1-\phi$ that are consistent with the statement $\phi u+(1-\phi)d=1+r$ or the equivalent statement, $\phi=(1+$ $r-d)/(u-d)$ . If we multiply by $S$ and do some rearranging, we obtain the following:  

$$
S=\frac{\phi S u+(1-\phi)S d}{1+r}.
$$  

This expression looks identical to a valuation equation. If $\phi$ were the probability of the price $S u$ occurring and $1-\phi$ were the probability of the price $_{S d}$ occurring, then the numerator would be the expected price. To value an asset, we discount the expected price by an appropriate rate. If the risk-free rate $r$ was the appropriate discount rate, then $s$ would be the price. It is a fact that $s$ is the asset price and also a fact that $S u$ and $S d$ are the possible future asset prices, but $\phi$ is not the probability of an upward move. Nonetheless, $\phi$ looks a lot like a probability and is used like a probability. In addition, $r$ is not the appropriate discount rate when applying the real probability, but it looks a lot like it and is used in that manner. The numerator of Equation (6.2) is sometimes referred to as a certainty equivalent, which is an amount of cash that an investor is willing to receive rather than take a stated risk.  

What we have done here is change the probabilities from their true values, $q$ and $1-q$ , to alternative values, $\phi$ and $1-\phi$ , such that we can use the risk-free rate as the discount rate. These probabilities are sometimes referred to as pseudo-probabilities because they are not the real probabilities, but they behave like them. They are more appropriately referred to as risk-neutral probabilities and sometimes martingale or equivalent martingale probabilities. We shall explain the martingale concept in a few paragraphs.  

The adjustment that enabled us to obtain Equation (6.2) is clearly correct and acceptable, inasmuch as it produces the correct stock price, S. What enables us to do this is the simple no-arbitrage condition that $u>1+r>d$ . The only information we need to know is the up and down factors and the risk-free rate. The up and down factors characterize the volatility of the asset. We have made no assumptions about how investors address risk. Indeed, what we have done is perfectly compatible with risk aversion. If investors are risk averse, which is what Equation (6.1) says, then Equation (6.2) also gives the value of the asset.  

What we have just illustrated is called the arbitrage theorem. It simply states that if there are no opportunities for arbitrage, then it is possible to state the price of the asset in terms of risk-neutral probabilities where the discounting is done at the risk-free rate. The theorem goes two ways. If it is possible to state the price of the asset in this manner, then there are no arbitrage possibilities.  

Calling $\phi$ and $1-\phi$ risk-neutral probabilities can be, however, a source of much confusion, inasmuch as it may imply that we are assuming investors are risk neutral, which we certainly are not. Alternatively, these probabilities are sometimes called martingale or equivalent martingale probabilities. A martingale is a stochastic process in which the expected return of the asset is the current value of the asset. Under the equivalent martingale approach, however, the future asset price is restated so as to be already discounted at the risk-free rate. That is, the right-hand side of Equation (6.2) is $\phi\widehat{S}u+(1-\phi)\widehat{S}d$ , where $\widehat{\boldsymbol{S}}=\boldsymbol{S}/(1+r)$ is an adjusted asset price. In other words, the future $S$ value is the future price already discounted.  

There is a definite relationship between the binomial probability, $\phi$ , and the actual probability, $q$ . Define the market price of risk of the stock as $\lambda=[E(R)-r]/\sigma$ where $E(R)$ is the expected return on the stock, which is $E(R)=q u+(1-q)d-1.$ . The stock’s variance is defined as $\sigma^{2}=q(1-q)(u-d)^{2}$ . These statements hold by definition. They are simply the expected value and volatility of a one-period binomially distributed variable, the return on the asset, that can go up to $S u$ or down to $S d$ . Substituting these values into the risk premium and noting that $\phi=(1+r-d)/(u-d)$ , we obtain the result,  

$$
\phi=q-\lambda\sqrt{q(1-q)}.
$$  

Thus, the binomial probability is the actual probability minus the risk premium times the square root term, which is related to the volatility. In short, knowing the binomial probability, $\phi=(1+r-d)/(u-d)$ , tells us everything we need to know to avoid having to know the market price of risk, $\lambda$ , and the actual probability, $q$ .  

Note that we have not introduced options. The point is easily established without the use of options. When introducing options, however, it is easily shown that a call option can be replicated by positions in the asset and the risk-free bond. That being the case, the call is a redundant asset. Consequently, introducing a redundant asset does nothing to change the nature of the market, provided, of course, that the redundant asset is properly priced. But that will be true by the requirement of no arbitrage.  

Though we have introduced this point in the simple binomial framework, it can also be established, albeit with more mathematical complexity in the continuous time models. This topic is covered in Chapter 12.  

# 6.3 IDENTICAL ASSETS AND THE LAW OF ONE PRICE  

Suppose there is another asset trading in a different market. If a good economy occurs, the asset will be worth 200, and if a bad economy occurs, it will be worth 100. Remember that the first asset pays 100 and 50 in the two outcomes. Notice that this second asset pays exactly two times the payoff of the good asset. Suppose that the first asset is trading for the price of 70, and the second asset is trading for 148. This situation creates an unstable condition that will bring out arbitrageurs who trade to earn risk-free profits without committing any of their own money.3  

These arbitrageurs will execute a very simple strategy. They will sell short the second asset, thereby collecting 148 while promising to buy that asset back at 200 if the good economy occurs or 100 if the bad one occurs.4 Now, they have 148 in cash up front. They take 140 and buy two shares of the first asset. They keep the remaining $148-140=8\$ .5 Let us see what happens for both possible outcomes.  

A good economy occurs: They are holding two shares of the first asset, which are collectively worth 200. They take the 200 and buy one share of the second asset, which they then deliver to cover their short position.  

A bad economy occurs: They are holding two shares of the first asset, which are collectively worth 100. They take the 100 and buy one share of the second asset, which they then deliver to cover their short position.  

In both outcomes, the shares they own will be precisely enough to repurchase the shares they have sold short. Thus, they are immune to the risk. They do not care which outcome occurs, because in either case they simply end up with 8 and the interest on it. They have, in effect, manufactured money without taking any risk, which is what arbitrage is.  

Naturally many investors will rush to do this transaction, which will put downward pressure on the price of the second asset or upward pressure on the price of the first asset, or a combination of both. Very quickly the two asset prices must align themselves so that the second asset price is twice that of the first. Under the principle of arbitrage, prices are in equilibrium relative to each other. We do not know or care if the first asset is priced correctly or the second asset is priced correctly. We simply care whether the two prices are properly aligned, in this case such that the second asset is worth twice the price of the first, so that an opportunity to make an arbitrage profit no longer exists.  

The principle of arbitrage also brings to light a result called the law of one price: Identical assets cannot sell for different prices. These assets may not appear to be identical assets, but their returns are perfectly synchronized. Regardless of which outcome occurs, the value of the second asset has to be twice that of the first. For an excellent treatment of arbitrage at an introductory level, see Billingsley (2006), and for more advanced coverage that will parallel most of the topics in the rest of this book, see Björk (1998).  

# 6.4 DERIVATIVE CONTRACTS  

Our ultimate interest is in one type of derivative, the option. Understanding option pricing is key to understanding the pricing of numerous other financial instruments. Before we get to options, however, let us take a look at a simpler type of derivative: the forward contract. Suppose we create a side bet on the outcome of the first asset. Let Trader A offer to pay Trader $\mathrm{~B~}26.50$ if the good economy occurs, provided that Trader B will pay Trader A 23.50 if the bad economy occurs. Suppose that Trader A borrows 70 at the risk-free rate of $5\%$ and uses the funds to purchase the asset. They then enter into this side bet to pay Trader $\mathrm{~B~}26.50$ if the good economy occurs with the condition that they receive 23.50 from Trader B if the bad economy occurs. The 70 Trader B borrows will have to be paid back, thereby requiring a payment of $70(1.05)=73.50$ one period later. Trader B’s overall payoff will be as follows:  

A good economy occurs: He holds an asset worth 100, owes 26.50, and pays back the loan value of 73.50 for a net cash flow of zero.  

A bad economy occurs: He holds an asset worth 50, receives 23.50, and pays back the loan value of 73.50 for a net cash flow of zero.  

Of course, there is no particular reason this investor should do this. They committed none of their own funds at the start and end up with no money regardless of the outcome. But this example illustrates that the side bet should pay 26.50 to one party if a good economy occurs and 23.50 to the other party if the bad economy occurs. These are fair equilibrium terms for the side bet.  

What if the side bet pays 26.50 if the good economy occurs and 25 if the bad one occurs? Then it should be apparent that if the bad economy occurs, Trader A will end up with $50+25-73.50=1.50.$ . If the good economy occurs, Trader A will end up with zero. So, without investing any of their own money, Trader A takes a gamble in which they either end up with no money or 1.50. Trader A will certainly do it, as will other arbitrageurs. Their collective actions force the terms of the side bet to change until the bet is a fair one for both parties. That naturally occurs if the payoff in the bad economy is 23.50.  

The two payoffs to Trader A, 26.50 in the good economy and $-23.50$ in the bad economy, can be derived as follows:  

If the good economy occurs: $100-x=26.50$ If the bad economy occurs: $50-x=-23.50$  

Clearly $x=73.50$ . This number is a special value and is the key to finding the equilibrium payoffs of the side bet. We could, however, have obtained that value in another and much easier way. We simply take the price of the asset, 70, and compound it at the risk-free rate, $5\%$ ,  

$$
70(1.05)=73.50.
$$  

This side bet illustrates a type of derivative transaction known as a forward contract. Embedded in a forward contract is the notion of a forward price. We can think of the forward price, 73.50 in this example, as the price that one party agrees to pay for the asset when the contract expires. Thus, here a party going long the forward contract agrees to pay 73.50 one period later. If the good economy occurs, the party pays 73.50 and receives the asset worth 100 for a net gain of 26.50. If the bad economy occurs, the party pays 73.50 and receives the asset worth only 50 for a net loss of 23.50. Thus, a forward contract is an agreement for one party to pay the forward price and receive the asset at a later date. The other party agrees to deliver the asset and receive the forward price.  

In this example, we assumed that the asset price was 70, which was the price appropriate for the highly risk-averse investor. Suppose we have a less risk-averse investor who considers the asset worth 80. In that case, the forward price would be 80(1.05)84. The forward contract would need to pay 16 to one party if the good economy occurs and 34 to the other party if the bad economy occurs. In this way, if someone did the transaction just described, that is, borrowed 80 at $5\%$ and offered the forward contract as a seller, they would end up with $100-16-84=0$ if the good economy occurs and $50-34-84=0$ if the bad economy occurs. This result is what it should be. The person committed no personal funds and took no risk. Therefore, the gain should be zero for certain.  

The point is that the forward price, whether 73.50 or 84, depends on the spot price of the underlying asset and the risk-free rate. It will also depend on how long the contract is and for some assets and some derivatives, it will depend on other factors.6 The most important point is that we take the asset price as given. We do not care whether the investors who priced the asset are highly risk averse, slightly risk averse, or risk neutral. We assume that how investors feel about risk is fully incorporated into the price of the asset. Once the asset price is determined, we do not care what factors investors consider in obtaining that price.  

With that in mind, we can treat our process of valuing derivatives as though investors are risk neutral. Consider the case where investors are highly risk averse and price the asset at 70. We noted that at a risk-free rate of $5\%$ , these investors are pricing the asset with a risk premium of $9.29\%$ , because the expected value of the asset is 80, which is $14.29\%$ higher than 70, but a portion of the $14.29\%$ is the risk-free return $(5.0\%)$ . For our forward contract, however, the forward price was found to be 73.50, which is only $5\%$ higher than the spot price of 70. Thus, the forward contract can be viewed as being priced by risk-neutral investors. That does not mean that investors are actually risk neutral. In fact, we just said they are highly risk averse in this example. But the forward price is found by taking the spot price of 70 and factoring it up to reflect only a risk-free return of $5\%$ , thereby obtaining 73.50 as the forward price. The principle that derivative instruments are priced to prohibit the opportunity to earn an arbitrage profit turns out to be the same as the notion that we can treat participants in derivative markets as though they are risk neutral. This simply means that derivatives are priced as though investors are risk neutral. In fact, they are not risk neutral but are risk averse. Their risk aversion is embedded into the price of the underlying asset. Given the price of the underlying asset, it is easy to price the derivative, using, of course, the condition of risk neutrality.  

Yet another way to look at it is that if we did not treat investors as though they were risk neutral when pricing derivatives, we would be double counting the risk. The risk is incorporated into the price of the asset. The price of the asset is then incorporated into the derivative price, which takes care of handling any adjustment for risk. We cannot treat the derivatives investor as though they require a premium as compensation for the risk. That premium is already there—in the price of the asset. We will return to this point in the last section of this chapter, where we introduce a world of risk-averse and risk-neutral investors.  

# 6.5 A FIRST LOOK AT VALUING OPTIONS  

Let us now create a different kind of derivative, a call option. We use the same example where the asset is priced at 70 and can go up to 100 with $60\%$ probability or down to 50 with $40\%$ probability. Suppose someone tells you that if you will give them some money today, you will acquire the right to buy the asset at 75 one period later but are not obliged to do so. Let us determine how much money you would need to pay to acquire that right.  

If the asset goes up to 100 in one period, you would pay your 75 and acquire the 100 asset, netting a gain of 25. If the asset goes down to 60, it would not be worth paying 75 to acquire the asset. You would simply choose not to acquire the asset, thereby ending up with zero. This asset, which is a call option, is therefore an instrument that pays either 25 or zero one period later. We wish to know how much you would have to pay for this asset. Clearly it is somewhere between 25 and zero.  

Suppose we buy two of these options and invest 47.62 in the risk-free asset, which will pay $5\%$ interest, so that one year later, it will be worth $47.62(1.05)=50.$ This 50 is the lower of the two outcomes for the asset. Now, consider the outcomes:  

If the good economy occurs: You exercise the option, paying 75 and acquiring an asset worth 100 for a gain of 25. Because two options have been purchased, you have 50. You collect your 50 from the risk-free asset for a total payoff of 100.  

If the bad economy occurs: The option will not be worth exercising. You will, however, collect the 50 on the risk-free asset, so your total payoff will be 50.  

So, in a good economy, your total wealth is 100 and in a bad economy, your total wealth is 50. These outcomes are the same as if you had bought the asset. Therefore, the amount you should have to pay to achieve this outcome should be the same as the cost of the asset, which is 70. Because you would pay 47.62 for the risk-free asset and you bought two options, the price of each option should be  

$$
{\frac{70-47.62}{2}}=11.19.
$$  

If the price of the option were lower than 11.19, one could buy the options and the risk-free asset and produce a payoff equal to that of the underlying asset. That means one could sell short the asset and receive net of 11.19 at the start, but one would pay less than 11.19. One period later, the options and the risk-free asset would exactly offset, thereby eliminating any uncertainty. One would then pocket the difference between 11.19 and what the option costs. If the option costs more than 11.19, the reverse arbitrage would be done: Sell the option and issue the risk-free bond, while buying the asset. In both cases, one earns an arbitrage profit. This arbitrage activity would continue until the price of the option adjusts to eliminate the opportunity. Of course, that occurs with the option price at 11.19.  

# 6.6 A WORLD OF RISK-AVERSE AND RISK-NEUTRAL INVESTORS  

It is widely accepted that we live in a world of risk-averse investors. There are certainly some exceptions. There are some irrational people who take gambles in which the odds are tilted heavily against them. Almost any form of organized betting is a good example. In addition, almost anyone who devotes the better years of their youth to pursuing a career in entertainment or sports is going up against enormous odds that almost surely have a negative expected return. Even entrepreneurship is a tremendously stacked gamble. Nonetheless, we can explain these seemingly irrational decisions because the participants are receiving a nonmonetary return. They enjoy participating in these endeavors, and that enjoyment can offset the expected monetary loss. And in some cases, they believe their odds are better than they really are.  

Most financial models assume that investors are risk averse. Yet option theory makes repeated references to risk neutrality. As we explained, pricing forwards and options proceeds as if investors are risk neutral, but we stressed that they are not risk neutral. We simply said that we can treat them as if they are risk neutral, even when they are not. This point is oftentimes not very clear.  

There is one way to help bring some focus to this confusing matter. Let us assume a market in which there are two sets of investors. One set is risk averse and the other is risk neutral. Let us use the example in which the asset can go up to 100 or down to 50 with respective probabilities of $60\%$ and $40\%$ . We stated previously that the expected payoff is 80. A risk-neutral investor would, therefore, discount 80 at $5\%$ and arrive at a price of 76.19, which we obtained at the beginning of this chapter. Recall that we had our risk-averse investor willing to pay only 70.  

Clearly these two investors can agree to trade with each other. If the risk-neutral investor is happy to pay 76.19, then they would clearly be happy paying a lesser amount. So, the risk-neutral investor would clearly pay the 70 price of the risk-averse investor. But the risk-averse investor would be happy to sell the asset at a higher price, say 76.19. So, the risk-averse investor would sell the asset to the risk-neutral investor for 76.19. Everyone would be happy, but it would be clear that the risk-averse investor would be earning far more than the expected return they demand in the face of the risk they assume. The risk-averse investor is obviously able to exploit the risk-neutral investor. The demand that risk-averse investors would exert on risk-neutral investors would eventually tell the latter that they are doing something wrong. In short, there cannot exist two prices.  

Now suppose the two parties engaged in an option transaction. Assuming the risk-averse investor’s price of the asset is 70, we obtain the 11.19 derived in the previous section. So, one investor thinks the option value is 11.19. The other would value the stock at 76.19. If we went through the valuation exercise, we would obtain an option price of 14.28. We saw in the previous section that the correct arbitrage-free value of the option is 11.19, and that if someone wants to trade at a higher price, an investor can engage in an arbitrage transaction to expropriate wealth from the investor who trades at any other price. As such, risk-averse investors would drive the risk-neutral investors out of the market. Or the latter would wake up and realize they are valuing assets the wrong way, because their preferences toward risk do not accurately characterize the way they really feel about risk.  

# 6.7 PRICING OPTIONS UNDER RISK AVERSION  

If risk-averse investors insisted on pricing options by incorporating their risk aversion, they should still arrive at the correct price. They would use the true probabilities, $q$ and $1-q{\mathrm{:}}$ , to discount the expected option payoff. Let $k_{o}$ be the discount rate of the option. For our example in which the arbitrage-free price of the option is 11.19, the option payoffs are 25 and zero, and the true probabilities are $60\%$ and $40\%$ , the option discount rate would be found as the solution to the following:  

$$
\begin{array}{r}{\frac{\S25(0.6)+\S0(0.4)}{1+k_{o}}=\S11.19\qquad}\\ {k_{o}=0.3405.}\end{array}
$$  

In other words, the discount rate on the option would be $34.05\%$ .  

The beauty of risk-neutral pricing is that we do not have to come up with the $34.05\%$ rate, nor do we have to come up with the true probabilities. All we have to know is the asset price, $S_{;}$ , the values of $\boldsymbol{u}$ and $d$ that describe the asset’s volatility, and the risk-free rate, $r$ . These requirements are far less onerous.  

It is important to note that risk-neutral pricing never asks how the asset price was obtained. It takes that price as being given in a market in which the buyer of the asset trades with the seller of the asset. A trade produces an asset price. Using that asset price, the price of the option can be obtained. What we do not know from option pricing is how that asset price was obtained. That is the subject of general equilibrium theory, which is a branch of economics and financial economics that studies how prices are determined in markets with buyers and sellers whose risk aversion influences how they price assets. In finance, models such as the CAPM are general equilibrium models. Models such as the arbitrage pricing theory and virtually all option pricing models are not general equilibrium models because they take market equilibrium as given without any regard to how that equilibrium occurred.7 These types of models are called partial equilibrium models because they explain how a part of the market, meaning a sector, reaches equilibrium. What they explain, however, is confined to the price and a few other characteristics that we will cover in Chapter 13. They do not explain why an investor would buy or sell an option and how many options an investor would trade.  

# 6.8 RECAP AND PREVIEW  

In this chapter, we reviewed the process of valuation, which is how one assigns a value to an asset or derivative. The general rule is to discount future cash flows at a rate that reflects risk. We noted, however, that risk-neutral valuation is also perfectly legitimate, though it values an asset only in relation to another asset whose value is known. We also took an introductory look at how to value options, which is the primary theme of this book, the details of which are fleshed out later.  

We have now completed Part I, which is largely review material. Part II begins our study of the formal process of valuing options. Chapter 7 introduces the binomial model, which we lightly touched on in the current chapter.  

# QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS  

1 “Risk-neutral pricing is flawed because it fails to incorporate risk.” Evaluate and explain whether this statement is true or false.   
2 Assume a given stock is trading at 100 and the total return if the up state occurs is $u=1.1$ and the total return if the down state occurs is $d=1/1.1$ . If the investor believes there is a $55\%$ chance of the up state occurring, calculate the risk premium if the risk-free rate is $1\%$ .   
3 Again, as in Question 2, assume a given stock is trading at 100 and the total return if the up state occurs is $u=1.1$ and the total return if the down state occurs is $d=1/1.1$ . The investor believes there is a $55\%$ chance of the up state occurring and the risk-free rate is $1\%$ . Calculate the risk-neutral probability of an up move. Explain what happens to the risk-neutral probability of an up move as interest rates fall.   
4 Within the single-period two-state world with $\boldsymbol{u}$ being the up factor, $d$ being the down factor, $r$ being the risk-free rate, and $q$ being the probability of an up move, prove that the variance of the return, $\sigma^{2}$ , is equal to $q(1-q)(u-d)^{2}$ .   
5 Explain the relationship between the binomial probability, $\phi$ , and the actual probability, $q$ , within a single-period binomial model.  

# NOTES  

1. When working through your understanding of financial derivatives with numerical examples, rounding is a constant source of potential confusion. Thus, we use the exact ratios rather than rounded values.   
2. The reason we see a 1 in front of the $r$ and not in front of the $\boldsymbol{u}$ and $d$ is that $\boldsymbol{u}$ and $d$ are already specified as 1 plus the up and down returns. In some books and articles, $r$ is already specified as 1 plus the risk-free rate.   
3. Some arbitrageurs take little if any risk, but there are also investors who ordinarily take risks who will notice the opportunity and engage in an arbitrage transaction.   
4. Short selling involves borrowing the asset from someone else, selling it to another party, and committing to repurchase the asset at a later date to return it to the original owner.   
5. That money would be invested to earn the risk-free rate of interest.   
6. For forward contracts on some assets, it will depend on the costs of carrying or storing those assets and any payments, such as dividends, that those assets make. For options, it depends on all of these factors as well as the volatility of the underlying asset.   
7. As its name suggests, arbitrage pricing theory is typically a linear multifactor model that seeks to identify mispriced instruments. Because our focus is on financial derivatives, we do not further explore this approach.  