# 14.4  THE PARAMETERS  

The process for a stock price developed in this chapter involves two parameters,. $\mu$ and $\sigma$ The parameter $\mu$ is the expected return (annualized) earned by an investor in a short period of time. Most investors require higher expected returns to induce them to take higher risks. It follows that the value of $\mu$ should depend on the risk of the return from the stock. It should also depend on the level of interest rates in the economy. The higher. the level of interest rates, the higher the expected return required on any given stock..  

Fortunately, we do not have to concern ourselves with the determinants of. $\mu$ in any detail because the value of a derivative dependent on a stock is, in general, independent of $\mu$ . The parameter $\sigma$ , the stock price volatility, is, by contrast, critically important to. the determination of the value of many derivatives. We will discuss procedures for estimating $\sigma$ in Chapter 15. Typical values of. $\sigma$ for a stock are in the range 0.15 to 0.60 (i.e., $15\%$ to $60\%$  

The standard deviation of the proportional change in the stock price in a small interval of time $\Delta t$ is $\sigma\sqrt{\Delta t}.$ As a rough approximation, the standard deviation of the proportional change in the stock price over a relatively long period of time. $T$ is $\sigma\sqrt{T}$ This means that, as an approximation, volatility can be interpreted as the standard. deviation of the change in the stock price in 1 year. In Chapter 15, we will show that the volatility of a stock price is exactly equal to the standard deviation of the continuously compounded return provided by the stock in 1 year.  
