# 14.1 THE MARKOV PROPERTY  

A Markov process is a particular type of stochastic process where only the current value. of a variable is relevant for predicting the future. The past history of the variable and the way that the present has emerged from the past are irrelevant..  

Stock prices are usually assumed to follow a Markov process. Suppose that the. price of a stock is $\$100$ now. If the stock price follows a Markov process, our. predictions for the future should be unaffected by the price one week ago, one month ago, or one year ago. The only relevant piece of information is that the price is now $\$100$ 1 Predictions for the future are uncertain and must be expressed in terms of. probability distributions. The Markov property implies that the probability distribution of the price at any particular future time is not dependent on the particular path followed by the price in the past..  

The Markov property of stock prices is consistent with the weak form of market efficiency. This states that the present price of a stock impounds all the information contained in a record of past prices. If the weak form of market efficiency were not true, technical analysts could make above-average returns by interpreting charts of the past history of stock prices. There is very little evidence that they are in fact able to do this.  

It is competition in the marketplace that tends to ensure that weak-form market efficiency and the Markov property hold. There are many investors watching the stock market closely. This leads to a situation where a stock price, at any given time, reflects the information in past prices. Suppose that it was discovered that a particular pattern in a stock price always gave a $65\%$ chance of subsequent steep price rises. Investors would attempt to buy a stock as soon as the pattern was observed, and demand for the stock would immediately rise. This would lead to an immediate rise in its price and the observed effect would be eliminated, as would any profitable trading opportunities.  
