# Pricing Forwards, Futures, and Options on Forwards and Futures  

o this point, we have focused exclusively on options and have paid almost no attention to other forms of derivatives. The reason for that approach is that options are somewhat more difficult to price than other derivatives. This is because option values are affected by volatility, and to model the effect of volatility, we have to incorporate characteristics of the distribution of the underlying, and we have to dynamically hedge the option. For other derivatives, the pricing process is much easier and the mathematics much simpler. In this chapter, we shall take a look at these other derivatives—forwards and futures—as well as options on forwards and futures.  

# 22.1 FORWARD CONTRACTS  

A forward contract is an agreement between two parties in which the buyer, or long, agrees that at a future date, called the expiration, the buyer will purchase an asset from the seller, or short, at a price they agree on today. This price they agree on is called the forward price. A forward contract is a firm commitment, which distinguishes it from an option. An option is a right, but not an obligation. The holder of the option can exercise it, but they will not do so if market conditions are not favorable. In a forward contract, the future transaction that the two parties agree on will be executed for certain.1 No money changes hands between the two parties when the contract is initiated. Thus, the contract is neither an asset nor a liability, and in fact, it has zero value at the start. When time elapses and the value of the underlying moves, value is created for one party and destroyed for the other.  

Forward contracts are completely customizable agreements that are typically created in a dealer or over-the-counter market.2 That is, a financial institution acting as a dealer offers to take either a long or short position. As such, it quotes the price at which it would buy, called the bid, and the price at which it would sell, called the ask. Another company, called an end user, has a need for a forward contract, such as to lock in the purchase price of an asset it intends to buy in the future, and enters into the contract with the dealer. The end user specifies exactly what terms it wants, such as the identity of the underlying and the expiration date.  

Many homes are purchased with forward contracts although typically not referenced in this way. Usually a potential buyer will sign a contract to purchase a home and also make a nonrefundable deposit. Assuming the seller meets all the contractual conditions, the buyer will purchase the home some time later at a closing meeting. The purchase terms are given in the forward contract.  

We now move into the heart of the analysis: the pricing and valuation of forward contracts.  

# 22.1.1 Pricing and Valuing Forward Contracts  

Note that the title of this section uses the words pricing and valuing. When talking about most assets, including options, we use the terms somewhat interchangeably, acknowledging, however, that value is what something is worth and price is what someone pays. When markets are efficient and, therefore, process all relevant information, price equals value. In the world of forwards, futures, and swaps, however, price and value are entirely different concepts.  

We start by assuming we are at time 0, at which time the underlying is at $S_{0}$ . Two parties enter into a forward contract in which the buyer agrees that at the expiration, time $T$ , it will pay an amount of money, $F_{0}(T)$ , to the seller and receive the underlying asset. The contract expires at time $T$ , and the time to expiration in years is $\tau$ . The parameter $F_{0}(T)$ is called the forward price. It is the price that will be paid by the buyer to the seller at the expiration. Because by now you understand options reasonably well, it might be useful to think of $F_{0}(T)$ as the analog of the option exercise price. Hence, the forward price will be on a similar order of magnitude to the value of the underlying, $S_{0}$ . But even though $F_{0}(T)$ is the forward price, it is not the value of the contract. You should think of value as the amount that would be paid by one party so that this party acquires the contract from the other. Let us denote the value of a forward contract as $V_{t}\big[F_{0}(\bar{T})\big]$ , which means the value of the forward contract at an arbitrary time $t$ with the contract expiring at time $T$ in which the forward price is $F_{0}(T)$ . Let us first establish the principle that the value of the contract at time zero is zero:  

$$
V_{0}\big[F_{0}(T)\big]=0.
$$  

This result is intuitive in that neither party pays the other any money at the start. We said that value is what one party pays to acquire something from another. With forward contracts, the two parties engage in the agreement, but neither pays any money to the other. Later we shall demonstrate a nonstandard circumstance in which value is not zero at time zero.  

Next, let us establish the value of the contract at expiration, which is as follows:  

$$
V_{T}\big[F_{0}(T)\big]=S_{T}-F_{0}(T).
$$  

This result is determined by precisely what happens at expiration, at which time the buyer of the contract pays the price, $F_{0}(T)$ , to the seller and receives the asset valued at $S_{T}$ . Therefore, the value to the buyer is $S_{T}-F_{0}(T)$ . Conversely, the value to the seller is $-\left[S_{T}-F_{0}(T)\right]$ . Note that the payoff here is linear in the underlying, whereas with options, the payoff is nonlinear in the underlying.3 This linearity will make a huge difference in how we construct a risk-free hedge that will provide the option value. Linearity will, in fact, make the risk-free hedge for a forward contract be static, rather than dynamic, as it is for options.  

Thus, forward pricing is a relatively simple matter, especially in comparison to option pricing. Suppose we sell a forward contract at price $F_{0}(T)$ and simultaneously buy one unit of the asset at price $S_{0}$ . At expiration, the short forward contract obligates us to deliver the asset and be paid $F_{0}(T)$ . So what will happen at expiration is simple. We will deliver the asset and be paid $F_{0}(T)$ . Note how the value of the asset at expiration, $S_{T}$ , is irrelevant to the payoff of the overall position of long the asset and short the forward contract. In fact, there is no risk to the overall position. The value at expiration of the position is $F_{0}(T)$ , and being risk free, this value should be discounted to the present at the risk-free rate to equal the value of the initial position. The value of the initial position is the value of the asset, $S_{0}$ , minus the value of the forward contract, but the value of the forward contract is zero by Equation (22.1). Thus, the value of the asset at time 0, $S_{0}$ , must equal the forward price discounted at the risk-free rate. Rearranging and solving for the forward price gives our forward pricing equation,  

$$
F_{0}(T)=S_{0}(1+r)^{\tau},
$$  

where $\tau$ is the time to expiration expressed as a fraction of a year. For forward contracts, this is the analog of the Black-Scholes-Merton equation. As you can see, it is much simpler. Now, let us consider the special case in which we create a forward contract an instant before expiration. Then $\tau\to0$ , and the new forward price would be the spot price,  

$$
F_{T}(T)=S_{T}(1+r)^{0}=S_{T}.
$$  

Forward contracts are often written on assets that have costs associated with holding them, and these assets can also yield cash flows, such as dividends, or other benefits. Let $\gamma(0,T)$ be the value at time $T$ of any accumulated costs minus any accumulated benefits. Then Equation (22.3) becomes  

$$
F_{0}(T)=S_{0}(1+r)^{\tau}+\gamma(0,T).
$$  

Note that $\gamma(0,T)$ can be either positive or negative depending on whether the costs exceed the benefits or vice versa. Further, there are numerous ways to incorporate asset-related cash flows. We chose here to introduce them as simply an addition.  

We have established the value of a forward contract at time 0 and the value at time $T_{\mathbf{\delta}}$ , the expiration. What we now need is the value at some arbitrary evaluation time $t$ , sometime between times 0 and $T_{\mathbf{\delta}}$ . This result is only slightly more difficult to establish. Thus, now consider that we are at the evaluation time $t_{:}$ , $0<t<T$ . The forward contract price was established at time 0 and set at $F_{0}(T)$ and is fixed. The spot price is $S_{t}$ . The remaining time to expiration will be denoted $\tau_{t}$ . To determine the value of this forward contract, let us sell a new forward contract expiring at $T.$ This contract will have a new price, $F_{t}(T)$ and a time to expiration of $\tau_{t}$ . Being long the original forward contract obligates us to buy the asset at time $T$ at price $F_{0}(T)$ , and being short a new forward contract obligates us to sell the asset at time $T$ at price $F_{t}(T)$ . The overall position is risk-free in that the value of the underlying at time $T$ will have no relevance to us. We will buy the asset at $F_{0}(T)$ and sell it at $F_{t}(T)$ . Thus, we are guaranteed that at time $T$ we will have a cash flow of $F_{t}(T)-F_{0}(T)$ , an amount that is known at time $t.$ . The present value from $T$ to $t$ equals the value of our overall position at time $t$ . Our overall position at time $t$ is the value of the long position in the original forward contract minus the value of the new forward contract that we are short. But the value of the new forward contract at $t$ is zero, because it is a newly established contract and, therefore, has a value of zero. Thus, the value of the original contract at $t$ is  

$$
V_{t}\big[F_{0}(T)\big]=\frac{F_{t}(T)-F_{0}(T)}{(1+r)^{\tau_{t}}}.
$$  

TABLE 22.1 Cash Flows for Long Forward Valuation   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Strategy</td><td>Cash Flow at Time O</td><td>Value at Time t</td><td>Cash Flow at Time T</td></tr><tr><td>Buy forward Fo(T)</td><td>0</td><td>V(T)</td><td>Vr[F(T)] = ST-F(T)</td></tr><tr><td>Sell forward Ft (T)</td><td>NA</td><td>0</td><td>Vr[F(T)] = F(T)-ST</td></tr><tr><td>Net Cash Flow/Value</td><td>0</td><td>Vt(T)</td><td>F(T)-F(T)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: NA indicates sell forward at time $t$ does not exist.  

Table 22.1 illustrates the cash flows at the three relevant times: the initial trade date, $(\tau=0)$ ), the evaluation date, $t.$ , and the expiration date, $T_{\mathbf{\delta}}$ . Adapting Equation (22.5) for the condition at time $t$ instead of time 0, we have the price of the new forward contract as  

$$
F_{t}(T)=S_{t}(1+r)^{\tau_{t}}.
$$  

Using this result in Equation (22.6), we can then restate the value equation as  

$$
V_{t}\big[F_{0}(T)\big]=S_{t}-\frac{F_{0}(T)}{(1+r)^{\tau_{t}}}.
$$  

Or essentially, the current spot price minus the present value of the original forward price. Note that if we set $t=0$ or $t=T$ in Equation (22.7), we obtain Equations (22.1) and (22.2):  

$$
\begin{array}{l}{t=0:V_{0}\big[F_{0}(T)\big]=S_{0}-F_{0}(T)/(1+r)^{\tau}=S_{0}-S_{0}=0}\\ {t=T:V_{T}\big[F_{0}(T)\big]=S_{T}-F_{0}(T)/(1+r)^{0}=S_{T}-F_{0}(T).}\end{array}
$$  

For example, assume at time 0 a one-year forward contract was entered at $\$25[F_{0}(T)]$ . You have been tasked with determining the fair value of this contract after nine months (time $t$ ). At time $t$ , we know the underlying instrument priced is $\$26$ and the interest rate is $3.902\%$ (annual compounding). In this case we know the price of a new forward contract is  

$$
F_{t}(T)=S_{t}(1+r)^{\tau_{t}}=26(1+0.03902)^{0.25}=26.25.
$$  

Further, the value of the initial long forward contract at time $t$ is  

$$
V_{t}\big[F_{0}(T)\big]=\frac{F_{t}(T)-F_{0}(T)}{(1+r)^{\tau_{t}}}=\frac{26.25-25}{(1+0.03902)^{0.25}}=\S1.238.
$$  

Note that the contract, which had a zero value nine months earlier, is now worth a positive value. Intuitively, its value has increased because it is the obligation to buy an asset that has since increased in value.  

# 22.1.2 Forward Contracts and Options  

Now, let us tie forward contracts back to options. First, note that because a long position in the asset, hedged with a short forward contract, can create a riskless position or essentially a risk-free bond, it follows that a position in the asset can be replicated by a long position in a forward contract and a long position in a risk-free bond. Recall that put-call parity states that  

$$
p_{0}+S_{0}=c_{0}+\frac{X}{\left(1+r\right)^{\tau}}.
$$  

Given Equation (22.3), we can substitute into put-call parity for $S_{0}$ and obtain  

$$
p_{0}+\frac{F_{0}(T)}{\left(1+r\right)^{\tau}}=c_{0}+\frac X{\left(1+r\right)^{\tau}}.
$$  

As such, Equation (22.10) expresses the relationships among the put price, the call price, the option exercise price, and the forward price. Note that because we are free to choose the exercise price of the options, we could set the exercise price to the forward price. Then $F_{0}(T)=X$ , and from Equation (22.10), we would have the put and call prices equal to each other.  

# 22.1.3 Some Additional Facts on Forward Contracts  

Finally, let us learn a few more important facts about forward contract pricing. We have said that a forward contract does not involve any exchange of money between buyer and seller at the start; hence, the value of the contract is zero at the start. This is the standard case, but it is not absolutely mandatory. The buyer and seller of a forward contract can set the price at whatever forward price they want. These types of contracts are called off-market forward contracts. First, take another look at Equation (22.3), which is repeated here:  

$$
F_{0}(T)=S_{0}(1+r)^{\tau}.
$$  

Suppose the parties set $F_{0}(T)$ to a value higher than the RHS. Now, let us see what happens. We first restate the value Equation, (22.7), with $t=0$ :  

$$
V_{0}\big[F_{0}(T)\big]=S_{0}-\frac{F_{0}(T)}{\left(1+r\right)^{\tau}}.
$$  

If the forward price is set to the formula price, Equation (22.3), this value goes to zero, as we have shown. But if the forward price is set higher than the formula price, then the value becomes negative. A negative value contract means that the seller must pay the buyer the value at the start. Let us think about this. If the forward price is too high, the buyer has agreed to pay too much at time $T$ for the asset. Hence, the seller has the advantage and must compensate the buyer for this additional value at time 0. If the forward price is set lower than the formula price, then the value in the above equation becomes positive. A positive value contract means that the buyer must pay the seller the contract value at the start. In this case, the buyer will be paying too little at time $T$ and must compensate the seller for this additional value at time 0.  

Finally, let us note several additional characteristics of forward contracts. Typical forward contracts contain provisions that allow either party to request a settlement of the other. That is, the contract can be terminated early. Suppose the long holds a position that has a value, as calculated in the manner shown in Equation (22.7), of $\$1.5$ million. The long and the short could, thus, terminate the contract before expiration by having the short pay the long $\$1.5$ million. If the value were negative, the long would pay the short. Either party can request an early termination, but typically one party is a dealer and dealers do not usually request early termination, because they exist to serve the needs of their clients and not to impose their own needs on their clients. The counterparty, who is usually an end user, would ordinarily be the one to request an early termination.  

Forward contracts can also be written to specify that at expiration the contract calls for physical delivery of the asset or an alternative procedure called cash settlement. Suppose, for example, that the buyer holds a forward contract on two million barrels of crude oil with a forward price of $\$70$ a barrel. Now, let us say we are at expiration and the price of crude oil is $\$75$ a barrel. A physical delivery contract would result in the short delivering two million barrels of oil to the long, who would pay the short $\$70$ a barrel. So the long benefits by acquiring two million barrels at $\$5$ per barrel below the market price. Alternatively, a cash-settled contract would result in the short simply paying the long $\$10$ million. By settling in cash, the two parties can avoid the high transaction costs of handling the oil.  

Forward contracts are subject to default. Technically the dealer or the end user could default. In deriving these pricing formulas, we have not taken default into account, because that is a subset of the subject of credit risk. Some forward contracts are processed through a clearinghouse and are subject to margin requirements and periodic settlements, which is the standard process used in futures contracts, as we explain next.  

# 22.2 PRICING FUTURES CONTRACTS  

A futures contract is effectively a forward contract that is resettled every day. That is, at the end of the day, the clearinghouse of the exchange determines an official settlement price, which is an average of the last few trades of the day. The change in the settlement price from the previous day is then credited to the party that gained and charged to the party that lost. Thus, if the settlement price increased (decreased), the holders of long (short) positions would be credited the gain and the holders of short (long) positions would be charged the loss. This process is called marking-to-market and, sometimes, the daily settlement. It effectively results in gains and losses being collected and charged in smaller amounts over shorter periods of time than in the case of forward contracts, whereby the contract is completely settled at expiration. The process of settling daily reduces the credit risk. In fact, futures exchanges guarantee that no one will fail to be paid because of the default of the opposite party. This guarantee has been absolutely fulfilled, because no party has ever lost money on any futures exchange in the world due to default of the counterparty. The exchange, through its clearinghouse, has always either collected the money or paid up itself.  

# 22.2.1 Daily Settlement and Futures Prices with Constant Interest Rates  

The daily settlement results in a difference in the pattern of cash flows to a holder of a futures contract in comparison to that of a holder of a forward contract. As it turns out, there are some circumstances in which this difference has no economic effect, and in most cases, it is likely to have no material impact. But let us start by seeing what the effect is, however small it might turn out to be. This work draws on Jarrow and Oldfield (1981) and Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1981).  

Let us set up the problem by denoting the futures price at time $t$ for a contract expiring at time $T$ as $f_{t}(T)$ . Futures contracts trade on a futures exchange and are, therefore, updated throughout the trading session. Our first important result is the convergence of the futures price at expiration to the spot price. That is, a futures contract that is created an instant before expiration will be priced at the spot price, because it will immediately expire and result in delivery of the spot asset, thus,  

$$
f_{T}(T)=S_{T}.
$$  

Now let us take a look at how one would value a futures contract. Suppose on day $t$ , the settlement price for the previous day was $f_{t-1}(T)$ . Now, here at the end of day $t$ the price is $f_{t}(T)$ . The accumulated value is $\ensuremath{f_{t}}(T)-\ensuremath{f_{t-1}}(T).\operatorname{Sc}$ , at this point, an instant before the daily settlement, the value of the futures contract is  

Before the daily settlement,  

$$
\nu_{t}(T)=f_{t}(T)-f_{t-1}(T).
$$  

That is, the value is simply the price change from the previous settlement. As soon as the market closes, the daily settlement at day $t$ will occur. If the previous value is positive (negative), the profit will be credited (charged) to the holder of the long position, and the loss will be charged (credited) to the holder of the short position. After the daily settlement, the value reverts to zero,  

After the daily settlement,  

$$
\nu_{t}(T)=0.
$$  

In effect, the daily settlement means that the contract is terminated and rewritten at the new settlement price. This is why we described a futures contract as a forward contract that is settled and rewritten every day.  

Now, let us take a look at when forward prices would equal futures prices. Table 22.2 illustrates the pattern of cash flows from day 1 through day $T.$ , the expiration.  

We want to know if the original forward price, $F_{0}(T)$ , would equal the original futures price, $f_{0}(T)$ . First, let us step back to one day prior to expiration, in which the futures price would be $f_{t-1}(T)$ . One day later the contract will expire and effectively conduct its last daily settlement. A forward contract created on that day will also settle one day later. Hence, the two contracts will have the same cash flow one day later; thus, the forward and futures prices will be the same,  

One day prior to expiration,  

$$
f_{T-1}(T)=F_{T-1}(T).
$$  

Stepping back one further day to $T-2$ , we can show that if the interest rate on day $t$ is known on day $t-1$ , the futures price on day $t$ would equal the forward price on day $t$ . Let us assume that the interest rate, $r$ , is constant from day to day, a common assumption in derivative pricing theory.4 Let us construct the following strategy: Buy one forward contract at the price $F_{T-2}(T)$ and sell $1/(1+r)$ futures at the price $f_{T-2}(T)$ . At the end of day $T-1$ , we generate no cash flow on the forward contract because it is not settled daily and has one more day to expiration. Through its daily settlement, however, the futures will produce a cash flow of $\mathsf{\bar{-}}\big[f_{T-1}(T)-f_{T-2}(T)\big]$ times $1/(1+r)$ contracts. If this amount is negative, let us borrow the funds at the rate $r$ for one day. If it is positive, we invest the funds at the rate $r$ for one day. By borrowing or investing the daily settlement cash flow, we avoid having to put up or withdraw funds on a day-to-day basis. One day later, which is expiration, the daily settlement amount at $T-1$ plus one day’s interest paid or received will be $-\left[f_{T-1}(T)-f_{T-2}(T)\right].$ . In addition, the final daily settlement will be $-\big[f_{T}(T)-f_{T-1}(T)\big]$ . Adding these two amounts gives a total cash flow at $T$ of $-\Bigl[\dot{f}_{T-1}(T)\dot{-}f_{T-2}(T)\Bigr]-\Bigl[\dot{f}_{T}(T)-\dot{f}_{T-1}(T)\Bigr]=\dot{f}_{T-2}(T)-\dot{f}_{T}(T)=\dot{f}_{T-2}(T)-{S_{T-1}}(T),$ . This is the same cash flow as on a two-day forward contract. We could successively create forwards and futures further back and similarly demonstrate that the cash flows would be the same. Hence, the price of a forward contract would equal the price of the analogous futures contract. Of course, similar to forwards, futures will also reflect carrying costs and any other potential benefits or costs of holding the asset.5  

TABLE 22.2 Cash Flows from Futures and Forward Contracts   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Day</td><td>Futures Cash Flow</td><td>Forward Cash Flow</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>f(T)-fo(T)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>f(T)-f(T)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>f(T)-f(T)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>T-2</td><td>fT-2(T)-fT-3(T)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>T-1</td><td>fT-1(T)-fT-2(T)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>T</td><td>ST-fT-1 (T)</td><td>ST-Fo(T)</td></tr></table></body></html>  

This result, however, was possible only because the interest rate was known in advance. In effect, we must know the entire sequence of one-day interest rates. In a world of constant interest rates, that is certainly not a problem. If interest rates are stochastic, however, that could be a problem. Let us now see why stochastic interest rates can drive the price of the futures contract above or below the price of the forward contract.  

# 22.2.2 The Daily Settlement and Futures Prices with Stochastic Interest Rates  

Consider a long position in a futures contract. If futures prices increase when interest rates increase, then gains will be realized and reinvested at higher interest rates. If futures prices increase when interest rates decrease, losses will be realized and financed at lower interest rates. Thus, when futures prices and interest rates are positively related, the daily settlement benefits parties who choose futures contracts over forward contracts, and as a result, futures prices will be above forward prices. If futures prices are negatively related to interest rates, then futures contracts will be hurt by the daily settlement, because gains will be reinvested when rates are lower and losses will be financed when rates are higher. This benefits parties who choose to take forward contracts over futures contracts. Thus, if futures prices are positively (negatively) related to interest rates, futures prices will be higher (lower) than forward prices. As you might expect, if futures prices are unrelated to interest rates, meaning essentially a zero correlation, futures and forward prices will be the same.  

These points are strong statements about the relationship between futures and forwards, but they are taken without consideration for credit risk. The daily settlement that is undertaken in futures markets essentially eliminates credit risk. Forward markets do retain some element of credit risk, but that element is minimized by the careful consideration of whether to engage in a forward contract with anyone who might default and by potentially requiring margin deposits and perhaps even periodically marking to market.  

If we minimize these credit considerations, futures prices will essentially equal forward prices, and therefore the futures pricing model would simply be a restatement of the forward pricing model, Equation (22.3),  

$$
f_{t}(T)=S_{t}(1+r)^{\tau_{t}}.
$$  

In the next section, we briefly review some anecdotal evidence related to futures pricing.  

# 22.2.3 Selected Futures Contracts—Gold, Wheat, and Natural Gas  

Table 22.3 presents the settlement prices for gold futures contracts traded on the CME Group exchange. Note that the pattern of futures prices with respect to maturity is monotonically increasing, a property known as contango. The pattern of futures prices with respect to maturity that is monotonically decreasing is known as backwardation.  

US gold futures contracts are almost always in contango. The reason is generally positive interest rates and positive storage costs as well as the ease with which to conduct arbitrage transactions. One key insight is that the upward sloping pattern does not reflect market participants’ views on the future of gold prices; rather, it reflects solely carrying costs related to the underlying instrument. Interestingly, the pattern does not occur with gold futures contracts in some other countries where it is difficult to actually engage in the required arbitrage transactions.  

TABLE 22.3 Selected Gold Futures Prices   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Description</td><td>Price</td></tr><tr><td>Spot (Sep)</td><td>$1,502.20</td></tr><tr><td>OctY1</td><td>$1,504.50</td></tr><tr><td>NovY1</td><td>$1,508.10</td></tr><tr><td>DecY1</td><td>$1,511.10</td></tr><tr><td>FebY2</td><td>$1,517.40</td></tr><tr><td>AprY2</td><td>$1,522.90</td></tr><tr><td>JunY2</td><td>$1,527.60</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

Table 22.4 presents the settlement prices for wheat futures contracts traded on the CME Group exchange. Note that the pattern of futures prices with respect to maturity is again monotonically increasing. Due to the difficulty in conducting arbitrage-related activities with wheat, this pattern of futures prices communicates different information than gold. Wheat is perishable and consumed. The pattern of US wheat futures contracts takes many different shapes over time, unlike gold contracts. For example, global harvest expectations play a key role in wheat futures prices. Thus, one key insight is that the upward sloping pattern for wheat does reflect market participants’ views on the future of wheat spot prices.  

Table 22.5 presents the settlement prices for natural gas futures contracts traded on the CME Group exchange. Note that the pattern of futures prices with respect to maturity is neither monotonically increasing nor decreasing. US natural gas futures contracts’ pattern takes many different shapes over time unlike gold contracts. As with wheat, the driving reason is that it is generally difficult to conduct the required arbitrage transactions as natural gas is volatile and difficult to store. Global natural gas production and consumption expectations also play a key role in futures prices. Natural gas is consumed in greater volumes in the summer months to generate electricity for air conditioning and in the winter months to run furnaces or generate electricity for heating. Thus, one key insight is that the dynamic pattern for natural gas does reflect market participants’ views on the future of natural gas spot prices. In particular, winter and often summer futures prices are higher than spring and fall.  

We turn now to explore options on forwards and futures contracts.  

TABLE 22.4 Selected Wheat Futures Prices   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Description</td><td>Price</td></tr><tr><td>Spot (Nov)</td><td>$4.744</td></tr><tr><td>DecY1</td><td>$4.744</td></tr><tr><td>MarY2</td><td>$4.790</td></tr><tr><td>MayY2</td><td>$4.814</td></tr><tr><td>JulY2</td><td>$4.840</td></tr><tr><td>SepY2</td><td>$4.914</td></tr><tr><td>DecY2</td><td>$5.036</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

TABLE 22.5 Selected Natural Gas Futures Prices   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Description</td><td>Price</td></tr><tr><td>Spot (Oct)</td><td>$2.585</td></tr><tr><td>NovY1</td><td>$2.625</td></tr><tr><td>DecY1</td><td>$2.768</td></tr><tr><td>JanY2</td><td>$2.859</td></tr><tr><td>FebY2</td><td>$2.811</td></tr><tr><td>MarY2</td><td>$2.685</td></tr><tr><td>AprY2</td><td>$2.399</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# 22.3 OPTIONS ON FORWARDS AND FUTURES  

Options on forwards are not widely used, but options on futures are very actively traded in the US. One of the reasons for this is that futures markets are quite transparent. Prices are readily available, and there is considerable liquidity for many of these instruments. With the underlying being a futures contract and it being so widely traded in typically quite liquid markets, it is not surprising that options on futures are quite popular. A long call option that is exercised leads to a long position in the futures, whereas the counterparty is assigned a short position in the futures. A put option that is exercised leads to a short position in the underlying, whereas the counterparty is assigned a long position. If the futures expires at the same time as the option, exercise of the option converts into a position in the futures that immediately converts into a position in the underlying asset. As such, a European option on a futures that expires at the same time as the futures would have the same price as the corresponding European option on the spot.  

Some options on futures, however, expire earlier than the underlying futures. In either case, however, we need an option pricing model that values the option in terms of the futures. Let us consider an option on a futures that expires in time $T^{*}$ and with a time to expiration is $\tau^{*}$ . The underlying futures expires at $T$ and the time to expiration of the futures is $\tau$ . To price this option, we shall construct a dynamically hedged portfolio of the option and the underlying futures. Specifically, we shall buy $b$ call options and sell one futures. The value of this portfolio at time $t$ is  

$$
\begin{array}{r}{\boldsymbol{w}_{t}=\boldsymbol{b}\boldsymbol{c}_{t}.}\end{array}
$$  

This equation does not imply that the futures price is zero when this portfolio is assembled. This statement is only that the value is xero. The price is certainly nonzero, and changes in price create value. If we properly choose the value of $b$ , we can convert this portfolio to a hedged portfolio so that the change in the value of the portfolio over the next instant can be expressed as  

$$
d w_{t}=d f_{t}+b d c_{t}.
$$  

Note a significant difference in Equations (22.16) and (22.17) that may seem inconsistent. In the latter, the value of the overall position reflects the change in both the value of the futures and the value of the option. For the former, the value of the futures starts off at zero, in accordance with the principle that the value of a futures is zero when initiated, just as with a forward contract.6 If the portfolio is completely hedged, its instantaneous return should be $\boldsymbol{w}_{t}\boldsymbol{r}_{c}d t$ . Hence, we can say that the change in the futures plus the change in the value of $b$ options must equal the initial value, $\boldsymbol{w}_{t}$ , plus interest,  

$$
\begin{array}{r}{d f_{t}+b d c_{t}=w_{t}r_{c}d t}\\ {=b c_{t}r_{c}d t.}\end{array}
$$  

As with standard European options on the spot asset, we can assume that the call price is a function of the futures price and time. As such, we can express the call price change using Itô’s lemma,  

$$
d c_{t}=\frac{\partial c_{t}}{\partial f_{t}}d f_{f}+\frac{\partial c_{t}}{\partial t}d t+\frac{1}{2}\frac{\partial^{2}c_{t}}{{\partial f_{r}}^{2}}d{f_{t}}^{2}.
$$  

Substituting Equation (22.19) into Equation (22.18) and rearranging, we obtain  

$$
{b c_{t}r_{c}d t}={d f_{t}}+{b}\Bigg({\frac{\partial{c_{t}}}{\partial{f_{t}}}}{d f_{t}}+{\frac{\partial{c_{t}}}{\partial t}}{d t}+\frac{1}{2}{\frac{\partial^{2}{c_{t}}}{\partial{f_{t}}^{2}}}{d f_{t}}^{2}\Bigg).
$$  

We are free to set the hedge ratio at whatever we want. Thus, if we set $b=-\partial f_{t}/\partial c_{t}$ , we obtain  

$$
-\left({\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial c_{t}}}\right)c_{t}r_{c}d t=d f_{t}-\left({\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial c_{t}}}\right)\left({\frac{\partial c_{t}}{\partial f_{t}}}d f_{t}+{\frac{\partial c_{t}}{\partial t}}d t+{\frac{1}{2}}{\frac{\partial^{2}c_{t}}{\partial f_{t}^{2}}}d f_{t}^{2}\right).
$$  

Rearranging, we have  

$$
-\left({\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial c_{t}}}\right)c_{t}r_{c}d t=-\left({\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial c_{t}}}\right)\left({\frac{\partial c_{t}}{\partial t}}d t+{\frac{1}{2}}{\frac{\partial^{2}c_{t}}{\partial{f_{t}}^{2}}}d{f_{t}}^{2}\right).
$$  

Because $d f_{t}$ is removed, the Equation (22.22) is non-stochastic, which means the risk is hedged away. Now, we need to simplify Equation (22.22). Recall the standard stochastic process for the asset, which we learned when studying options,  

$$
d S_{t}=S_{t}\alpha d t+S_{t}\sigma d\mathrm{W}_{t}.
$$  

And recall the futures pricing model, Equation (22.15). Because we are now in continuous time, we should use its continuous analog,  

$$
f_{t}=S_{t}e^{r_{c}\tau}.
$$  

Because the futures price is known to be a function of time and the spot price, which we know follows geometric Brownian motion, we can express the futures price in terms of the spot price and time using Itô’s lemma,  

$$
d f_{t}=\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial S_{t}}d S_{t}+\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial t}d t+\frac{1}{2}\frac{\partial^{2}f_{t}}{\partial{S_{t}}^{2}}d{S_{t}}^{2}.
$$  

Equation (22.25) contains partial derivatives that can be derived from Equation (22.24) as follows:7  

$$
\begin{array}{c}{\displaystyle\frac{\partial{f_{t}}}{\partial{S_{t}}}=e^{r_{c}\tau}}\\ {\displaystyle\frac{\partial^{2}{f_{t}}}{\partial{S_{t}}^{2}}=0}\end{array}
$$  

$$
\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial t}=-r S_{t}e^{r_{c}\tau},
$$  

and insert these into Equation (22.25),  

$$
d f_{t}=e^{r_{c}\tau}d S_{t}+-r S_{t}e^{r_{c}\tau}+0.
$$  

Substituting the stochastic process of the asset from Equation (22.23), the expression for $d f_{t}$ then becomes  

$$
\begin{array}{c}{d f_{t}=f_{t}\big(\alpha d t+\sigma d\mathrm{W}_{t}\big)+-r_{c}f_{t}d t}\\ {=f_{t}\big(\alpha-r_{c}\big)d t+f_{t}\sigma d\mathrm{W}_{t}.}\end{array}
$$  

Squaring this equation, we now know that $d f_{t}^{2}$ will be $f_{t}^{2}{\sigma}^{2}d t$ . Then, substituting into Equation (22.22), we obtain  

$$
-\left(\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial c_{t}}\right)c_{t}r d t=-\left(\frac{\partial f_{t}}{\partial c_{t}}\right)\left(\frac{\partial c_{t}}{\partial t}d t+\frac{1}{2}\frac{\partial^{2}c_{t}}{\partial f_{t}^{~2}}f_{t}^{~2}\sigma^{2}d t\right).
$$  

Now multiply by $\partial c_{t}/\partial f_{t}$ and rearrange to obtain  

$$
c_{t}r_{c}=\frac{\partial c_{t}}{\partial t}+\frac{1}{2}\frac{\partial^{2}c_{t}}{{\partial f_{t}^{2}}}{f_{t}^{2}\sigma^{2}}.
$$  

This equation is very similar to the partial differential equation for Black-Scholes-Merton. One difference is that in the BSM equation, there is a term $r_{c}S_{t}\partial c_{t}/\partial S_{t}$ , which reflects interest on the funds tied up in the underlying. Here, however, there are no funds tied up in the underlying, because it is a futures.  

The boundary condition is $c_{T}=\operatorname*{max}\bigl(0,f_{T}-X\bigr).$ The solution is similar to the BSM model and is often referred to as the Black model, as Fischer Black provided this result in a separate paper (Black 1976):  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{c_{t}=e^{-r_{c}\tau^{*}}\big[f_{t}N\big(d_{1}\big)-X N\big(d_{2}\big)\big]}\\ &{d_{1}=\frac{\ln\left(\frac{f_{t}}{X}\right)+\left(\frac{\sigma^{2}}{2}\right)\tau^{*}}{\sigma\sqrt{\tau^{*}}}}\\ &{d_{2}=d_{1}-\sigma\sqrt{\tau^{*}}.}\end{array}
$$  

Recall that the option expiration, $\tau^{*}$ is shorter than the futures expiration, $\tau$ . If the option and futures expire at the same time, we would insert $\tau$ for $\tau^{*}$ and using the futures pricing equation, (22.24), we would find that Equation (22.31) would be precisely the BSM equation for the value of an option on the asset. Based on put-call parity, we can easily find the put option equation or  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{\boldsymbol{p}_{t}=c_{t}-e^{-r_{c}\tau^{*}}\big(f_{t}-X\big)}\\ &{\quad=e^{-r_{c}\tau^{*}}\big\{X\big[1-N\big(d_{2}\big)\big]-f_{t}\big[1-N\big(d_{1}\big)\big]\big\}}\\ &{\quad=e^{-r_{c}\tau^{*}}\big[X N\big(-d_{2}\big)-f_{t}N\big(-d_{1}\big)\big].}\end{array}
$$  

We now illustrate this model with a numerical example. Suppose the futures price is $\$52$ , the exercise price is $\$52.8$ , the time to expiration of the option contract is 0.25, the interest rate is $2.0\%$ , and the volatility is $35\%$ . First, solving for the value of $d_{1}$ and $d_{2}$ , we have  

$$
\begin{array}{l}{d_{1}=\displaystyle\frac{\ln\left(\frac{f_{t}}{X}\right)+\left(\frac{\sigma^{2}}{2}\right)\tau^{*}}{\sigma\sqrt{\tau^{*}}}=\displaystyle\frac{\ln\left(\frac{52}{52.8}\right)+\left(\frac{0.35^{2}}{2}\right)0.25}{0.35\sqrt{0.25}}=0.000}\\ {d_{2}=d_{1}-\sigma\sqrt{\tau^{*}}=0.000-0.35\sqrt{0.25}=-0.175.}\end{array}
$$  

Based on Table 5.1: Standard Normal Cumulative Distribution Function Table, we have  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{c_{t}=e^{-r_{c}\tau^{*}}\left[f_{t}N\big(d_{1}\big)-X N\big(d_{2}\big)\right]}\\ &{\quad=e^{-(0.02)0.25}\left[52(0.5)-52.8(0.430540)\right]}\\ &{\quad=3.2512\mathrm{and}}\end{array}
$$  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{{\mathscr P}_{t}=c_{t}-e^{-r_{c}\tau^{*}}\left(\fint_{t}-X\right)}\\ &{\quad=3.2512-e^{-(0.02)0.25}(52-52.8)}\\ &{\quad=4.0472.}\end{array}
$$  

As the case with options on the spot, American options on futures are considerably more complex than European options on futures. What further complicates options on futures, however, is that call options could be optimally exercised early, which is not the case with options on the spot, as we have already discussed. This result occurs because of how the futures price converges to the spot price. Notice in Equation (22.3), the futures is higher than the spot. As expiration approaches, the futures must be pulled toward the spot. This pulling effect operates somewhat like a dividend, which pulls a stock price down. As we studied with options on stocks, a dividend can trigger early exercise that avoids the loss due to the downward pressure on the underlying. This downward pressure on the futures has the same effect. As such, it might be optimal to exercise a call option on a futures early. Put options can also be exercised early, just as with put options on assets, but the downward pressure that can trigger the early exercise of call options on futures will discourage the early exercise of put options on futures. If there are carrying costs or other benefits related to the futures price, the probability of early exercise will be altered, depending on the magnitude of these costs.8 Pricing an American call on a futures will typically use a numerical method, such as the binomial model. There is also an approximation formula that is a variation of the Barone-Adesi-Whaley formula we discussed in Chapter 19.  

# 22.4 RECAP AND PREVIEW  

In this chapter, we introduced a different type of derivative, the forward contract and its variant the futures contract. We showed how these derivatives are priced, which is by the same principle as option pricing, but which does not require a dynamic hedge. As such,  

the math is much simpler. We also took a look at options on forwards and futures, which is our first attempt to integrate both options, which have nonlinear payoffs, and forwards and futures, which have linear payoffs.  

We have now completed Part IV. In Part V, we take up two methods of obtaining numerical solutions for option prices.  

# QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS  

1 Assume at time 0 a five-year forward contract was entered at $\$75\left[F_{0}(T)\right].$ . You have been tasked with determining the fair value of this contract after two years. At that time, the underlying instrument price is $\$70$ and the interest rate is $4.89\%$ (annual compounding). Calculate the forward price after two years as well as the value of the initial forward contract entered at time 0.  

2 Assuming the underlying follows geometric Brownian motion, $d S_{t}=S_{t}\alpha d t+S_{t}\sigma d\mathrm{W}_{t}.$ , derive the stochastic process of the forward price where the interest rate and dividend yield are expressed in continuous compounding, that is, $F_{0}(T)=S_{0}e^{(r_{c}-\delta)\tau}$ .  

3 Derive the delta of a call option on a futures contract assuming  

$$
\begin{array}{r l}&{c_{t}=e^{-r_{c}\tau^{*}}\left[f_{t}N\big(d_{1}\big)-X N\big(d_{2}\big)\right]}\\ &{d_{1}=\frac{\ln\left(\frac{f_{t}}{X}\right)+\left(\frac{\sigma^{2}}{2}\right)\tau^{*}}{\sigma\sqrt{\tau^{*}}}}\\ &{d_{2}=d_{1}-\sigma\sqrt{\tau^{*}}.}\end{array}
$$  

Hint: It is helpful to use the following relationship between these two probability density functions:  

$$
n\big(d_{2}\big)=\frac{e^{r_{c}\tau^{*}}f_{t}}{X}n\big(d_{1}\big).
$$  

4 Derive the gamma of a call option on a futures contract.  

5 Derive the theta of a call option on a futures contract.  

6 Demonstrate that the call option on futures model is valid when compared to the partial differential equation. Specifically, substitute the partial derivatives in the PDE and demonstrate coherence.  

7 Suppose the futures price is $\$24.8$ , the exercise price is $\$24$ , the time to expiration is 4.0, the interest rate is $1.0\%$ , continuously compounded, and the volatility is $30\%$ . Compute the call and put futures option prices.  

# NOTES  

1. We shall see that it is possible that the two parties can offset or negate their transaction before the expiration date, and one party can sell its obligation to another party. This is the only way in which exercise is avoided, but each party must still effectively do something for the other, and the arrangement must be fair from the perspective of both parties. In an option, however, the long can simply walk away without doing anything.   
2. Options can also be created on the over-the-counter market, or on an exchange. Forwards, however, are not offered on exchanges, though they can be offered in a near-exchange manner, such as on electronic trading platforms.   
3. Terminal option payoffs are piecewise linear rather than simply linear.   
4. We shall discuss what happens if $r$ is not constant.   
5. Observers of futures markets note that futures prices are sometimes not equal to the spot price grossed up by the interest plus the carrying costs as a result of a rather vaguely specified benefit called the convenience yield. This effect is a factor in the pricing of the underlying asset that occurs sometimes in shortages, wherein the underlying asset has an abnormally high price, a result of tight market conditions. When this happens, the asset is hard to borrow because owners hold on to it. Shorting is, thus, virtually impossible and the futures could appear to violate the no-arbitrage formula, Equation (22.3), when in fact the effect is driven by an inability to short the asset. The deviation of the futures price from the no-arbitrage formula is, thus, often plugged with a concept called the convenience yield. For more details, see Brooks (2012).   
6. As we said, the value of the futures is the accumulated price change since the last settlement. Because there has been no previous settlement, the value is zero.   
7. It may be a little unclear in taking the first derivative with respect to time as to why we obtain the $-r$ . We have to differentiate $\tau$ with respect to $t$ . The parameter $\tau$ is the time to expiration in years. The parameter $t$ is just a time indicator. We can think of it somewhat like the value of 1∕365, though it is technically a smaller unit than 1∕365. Nonetheless, the effect is the same when we differentiate $\tau$ . In other words, the derivative of $\tau$ with respect to $t$ is simply $^{-1}$ .   
8. These points are covered in considerable detail in Brenner, Courtadon, and Subrahmanyam (1985).  