# 6.6 A WORLD OF RISK-AVERSE AND RISK-NEUTRAL INVESTORS

It is widely accepted that we live in a world of risk-averse investors. There are certainly some exceptions. There are some irrational people who take gambles in which the odds are tilted heavily against them. Almost any form of organized betting is a good example. In addition, almost anyone who devotes the better years of their youth to pursuing a. career in entertainment or sports is going up against enormous odds that almost surely. have a negative expected return. Even entrepreneurship is a tremendously stacked gamble. Nonetheless, we can explain these seemingly irrational decisions because the participants. are receiving a nonmonetary return. They enjoy participating in these endeavors, and that enjoyment can offset the expected monetary loss. And in some cases, they believe their odds are better than they really are..

Most financial models assume that investors are risk averse. Yet option theory makes repeated references to risk neutrality. As we explained, pricing forwards and options proceeds as if investors are risk neutral, but we stressed that they are not risk neutral. We simply said that we can treat them as if they are risk neutral, even when they are not. This point is oftentimes not very clear.

There is one way to help bring some focus to this confusing matter. Let us assume. a market in which there are two sets of investors. One set is risk averse and the other is risk neutral. Let us use the example in which the asset can go up to 100 or down to. 50 with respective probabilities of $60\%$ and $40\%$ . We stated previously that the expected payoff is 80. A risk-neutral investor would, therefore, discount 80 at $5\%$ and arrive at a price of 76.19, which we obtained at the beginning of this chapter. Recall that we had our. risk-averse investor willing to pay only 70.

Clearly these two investors can agree to trade with each other. If the risk-neutral. investor is happy to pay 76.19, then they would clearly be happy paying a lesser amount. So, the risk-neutral investor would clearly pay the 70 price of the risk-averse investor. But the risk-averse investor would be happy to sell the asset at a higher price, say 76.19. So, the risk-averse investor would sell the asset to the risk-neutral investor for 76.19. Every-. one would be happy, but it would be clear that the risk-averse investor would be earning. far more than the expected return they demand in the face of the risk they assume. The risk-averse investor is obviously able to exploit the risk-neutral investor. The demand that risk-averse investors would exert on risk-neutral investors would eventually tell the latter that they are doing something wrong. In short, there cannot exist two prices..

Now suppose the two parties engaged in an option transaction. Assuming the.
risk-averse investor's price of the asset is 70, we obtain the 11.19 derived in the previous.
section. So, one investor thinks the option value is 11.19. The other would value the stock at 76.19. If we went through the valuation exercise, we would obtain an option price of.
14.28. We saw in the previous section that the correct arbitrage-free value of the option.
is 11.19, and that if someone wants to trade at a higher price, an investor can engage.

in an arbitrage transaction to expropriate wealth from the investor who trades at any other price. As such, risk-averse investors would drive the risk-neutral investors out of the market. Or the latter would wake up and realize they are valuing assets the wrong way, because their preferences toward risk do not accurately characterize the way they really feel about risk.
