---
tags:
  - aggregate_consumption
  - brownian_motion
  - consumption
  - discrete_time_economy
  - market_completeness
  - risk_aversion
  - state_price
  - state_price_deflator
  - utility_function
aliases:
  - exercise 7.1
  - exercise 7.2
  - exercise 7.3
  - exercise 7.4
  - exercise 7.5
  - exercise 7.6
  - exercise 7.7
key_concepts:
  - Brownian motion
  - European call options
  - aggregate consumption dynamics
  - extended log-utility
  - market price of risk
  - negative exponential utility
  - risk-free rate
  - state-contingent dividends
  - state-price deflator
  - time-additive expected utility
  - utility of individuals
---

# 7.5 Exercises  

EXERCISE 7.1 Suppose $\eta_{1}$ and $\eta_{2}$ are strictly positive numbers and that $u_{1}(c)=u_{2}(c)=$ $c^{1-\gamma}/(1-\gamma)$ for any non-negative real number $c$ . Define the function $u_{\eta}:\mathbb{R}_{+}\to\mathbb{R}$ by  

$$
u_{\eta}(x)=\operatorname*{sup}\left\{\eta_{1}u_{1}(y_{1})+\eta_{2}u_{2}(y_{2})|y_{1}+y_{2}\leq x;y_{1},y_{2}\geq0\right\}.
$$  

Show that $u_{\eta}(x)=k x^{1-\gamma}/(1-\gamma)$ for some constant $k$ . What is the implication for the utility of representative individuals?  

EXERCISE 7.2 Show Theorem 7.7 for the case of extended log-utility and the case of negative exponential utility.  

EXERCISE 7.3 Suppose that aggregate time 1 consumption can only take on the values. $1,2,\ldots,K$ for some finite integer $K$ . Assume that European call options on aggregate consumption are traded for any exercise price $0,1,2,\ldots,K$ . Consider a portfolio with one unit of the option with exercise price $k-1$ , one unit of the option with exercise price $k+1$ , and minus two units of the option with exercise price $k$ . What is the payoff of this portfolio? Discuss the consequences of your findings for the (effective) completeness of the market. Could you do just as well with put options?  

EXERCISE 7.4 Assume a discrete-time economy with $L$ agents. Each agent $l$ maximizes timeadditive expected utility $\mathrm{E}\left[\sum_{t=0}^{T}\beta_{l}^{t}u_{l}(c_{l t})\right]$ where $u_{l}$ is strictly increasing and concave. Show that  

$$
\frac{\zeta_{t+1}}{\zeta_{t}}=\frac{\sum_{l=1}^{L}\beta_{l}u_{l}^{\prime}(c_{l,t+1})}{\sum_{l=1}^{L}u_{l}^{\prime}(c_{l t})}
$$  

is a valid one-period state-price deflator, i.e. that it is strictly positive and satisfies $\mathrm{E}_{t}[(\zeta_{t+1}/\zeta_{t})R_{t+1}]=$ 1 for any gross return $R_{t+1}$ over the period $[t,t+1]$  

EXERCISE 7.5  George and John live in a continuous-time economy in which the relevant uncertainty is generated by a one-dimensional standard Brownian motion. $z=(z_{t})_{t\in[0,T]}$ .Both have time-additive utility of their consumption process: George maximizes.  

$$
U_{G}(c)=\mathrm{E}\left[\int_{0}^{T}e^{-0.02t}\ln c_{t}d t\right],
$$  

while John maximizes  

$$
U_{J}(c)=\operatorname{E}\left[\int_{0}^{T}e^{-0.02t}\left(-{\frac{1}{c_{t}}}\right)d t\right].
$$  

George's optimal consumption process $c_{G}=\left(c_{G t}\right)$ has a constant expected growth rate of 4% and a constant volatility of $5\%$ , i.e.  

$$
d c_{G t}=c_{G t}\left[0.04d t+0.05d z_{t}\right].
$$  

Two assets are traded in the economy. One asset is an instantaneously risk-free bank account with continuously compounded rate of return $r_{t}$ .The other asset is a risky asset with price process $P=\left(P_{t}\right)$ satisfying  

$$
d P_{t}=P_{t}\left[\mu_{P t}d t+0.4d z_{t}\right]
$$  

for some drift. $\mu_{P t}$ . The market is complete.  

(a) What are the relative risk aversions of George and John, respectively?   
(b) Using the fact that a state price deflator can be derived from George's consumption process, determine the risk-free rate $r_{t}$ and the market price of risk $\lambda_{t}$ . What can you conclude about the price processes of the two assets?  

(c) Find the drift and volatility of John's optimal consumption process, $c_{J}=\left(c_{J t}\right)$  

(d) Suppose George and John are the only two individuals in the economy. What can you say about the dynamics of aggregate consumption? Can the representative agent have constant relative risk aversion?  

EXERCISE 7.6 Consider a discrete-time economy with $L$ individuals with identical preferences so that agent $l=1,\ldots,L$ at time 0 wants to maximize  

$$
\operatorname{E}\left[\sum_{t=0}^{T}\beta^{t}{\frac{1}{1-\gamma}}c_{l,t}^{1-\gamma}\right]
$$  

where $c_{l,t}$ denotes the consumption rate of individual $l$ at time $t$ . Let $c_{l,t}^{*}$ be the optimal consumption rate of individual. $l$ at time $t$  

(a) Argue why  

$$
\frac{\zeta_{t+1}}{\zeta_{t}}=\frac{\beta}{L}\sum_{l=1}^{L}\left(\frac{c_{l,t+1}^{*}}{c_{l,t}^{*}}\right)^{-\gamma}
$$  

is a state-price deflator between time $t$ and time $t+1$  

(b) If the market is complete, explain why the next-period state-price deflator in $(^{*})$ can be written as  

$$
\frac{\zeta_{t+1}}{\zeta_{t}}=\beta\left(\frac{\sum_{l=1}^{L}c_{l,t+1}^{\ast}}{\sum_{l=1}^{L}c_{l,t}^{\ast}}\right)^{-\gamma}.
$$  

EXERCISE 7.7 (Use spreadsheet or similar computational tool.) Consider a one-period economy with 5 possible states and 5 assets traded. The state-contingent dividends and prices of the assets and the state probabilities are as follows:.  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>state 1</td><td>state 2</td><td>state 3</td><td>state 4</td><td>state 5</td><td>price</td></tr><tr><td>Asset 1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>0.9</td></tr><tr><td>Asset 2</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>6</td><td>8</td><td>1.7</td></tr><tr><td>Asset 3</td><td>4</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2.3</td></tr><tr><td>Asset 4</td><td>10</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>4.3</td></tr><tr><td>Asset 5</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>0</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>2.8</td></tr><tr><td>probability</td><td>0.25</td><td>0.25</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.1</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

(a) Verify that the market is complete and find the unique state-price deflator.  

Consider an individual investor, Alex, with access to the above financial market with the given prices. Suppose Alex has time-additive expected utility with a time preference rate of $\delta=0.03$ and a constant relative risk aversion of. $\gamma=2$ . Suppose his optimal consumption at time. $0$ is 5 and that he will receive an income of 5 at time 1 no matter which state is realized..  

(b) What is Alex' optimal time 1 consumption? What does it cost him to finance that consumption? What is the optimal portfolio for Alex?  

Suppose now that there is only one other individual, Bob, in the economy. Bob also has timeadditive expected utility with a time preference rate of 0.03 but a relative risk aversion of 5. Bob's. optimal time 0 consumption is also 5..  

(c) What is Bob's optimal time 1 consumption?   
(d) What is the aggregate time 0 consumption and the state-dependent aggregate time 1 consumption?   
(e) What is Bob's time 0 endowment and state-dependent time 1 endowment? What is Bob's optimal portfolio?   
(f) Verify that the markets clear.  

EXERCISE 7.8  Bruce lives in a continuous-time complete market economy. He has timeadditive logarithmic utility, $u_{B}(c)=\ln{c}$ , with a time preference rate of $\delta_{B}=0.02$ , and his optimal consumption process $c_{B}=\left(c_{B t}\right)$ has dynamics  

$$
d c_{B t}=c_{B t}\left[0.03d t+0.1d z_{t}\right],
$$  

where $z=\left(z_{t}\right)$ is a standard Brownian motion.  

(a) Characterize the state-price deflator induced by Bruce's optimal consumption process? Identify the continuously compounded short-term risk-free interest rate and the instantaneous. Sharpe ratio of any risky asset.  

Patti lives in the same economy as Bruce. She has time-additive expected utility with a HARA utility function $\begin{array}{r}{u_{P}(c)=\frac{1}{1-\gamma}(c-\bar{c})^{1-\gamma}}\end{array}$ and a time preference rate identical to Bruce's, i.e. $\delta_{P}=0.02$  

(b) Explain why Patti's optimal consumption strategy $c_{P}=\left(c_{P t}\right)$ must satisfy  

$$
c_{P t}=\bar{c}+\left(\frac{c_{B t}}{c_{B0}}\right)^{1/\gamma}\left(c_{P0}-\bar{c}\right).
$$  

Find the dynamics of Patti's optimal consumption process.  
