# 7.12 CREDIT DEFAULT SWAPS  

A swap which has grown in importance since the year 2000 is a credit default swap (CDS). This is a swap that allows companies to hedge credit risks in the same way that they have hedged market risks for many years.A CDS is like an insurance contract that pays off if a particular company or country defaults. The company or country is known as the reference entity. The buyer of credit protection pays an insurance premium, known as the CDS spread, to the seller of protection for the life of the contract or until the reference entity defaults. Suppose that the notional principal of the CDS is $\$100$ million and the CDS spread for a five-year deal is 120 basis points. The insurance premium would be 120 basis points applied to $\$100$ million or $\$1.2$ million per year. If the reference entity does not default during the five years, nothing is received in return for the insurance premiums. If reference entity does default and bonds issued by the reference entity are worth 40 cents per dollar of principal immediately after default, the seller of protection has to make a payment to the buyer of protection equal to $\$60$ million. The idea here is that, if the buyer of protection owned a portfolio of. bonds issued by the reference entity with a principal of. $\$100$ million, the insurance payoff would be sufficient to bring the value of the portfolio back up to. $\$100$ million.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Business Snapshot 7.2  The Hammersmith and Fulham Story</td></tr><tr><td>Between 1987 to 1989 the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham in Great Britain entered into about 600 interest rate swaps and related instruments with a total entered into for speculative rather than hedging purposes. The two employees of Hammersmith and Fulham that were responsible for the trades had only a sketchy understanding of the risks they were taking and how the products they were trading worked. By 1989, because of movements in sterling interest rates, Hammersmith and Fulham</td></tr><tr><td>had lost several hundred million pounds on the swaps. To the banks on the other side of the transactions, the swaps were worth several hundred million pounds. The banks were concerned about credit risk. They had entered into offsetting swaps to hedge their interest rate risks. If Hammersmith and Fulham defaulted they would still have to honor their obligations on the offsetting swaps and would take a huge loss.</td></tr><tr><td>What happened was something a little different from a default. Hammersmith and Fulham's auditor asked to have the transactions declared void because Hammersmith and Fulham did not have the authority to enter into the transactions. The British courts agreed. The case was appealed and went all the way to the House of Lords, then Britain's highest court. The final decision was that Hammersmith and Fulham did not have the authority to enter into the swaps, but that they ought to have the authority to</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Credit default swaps are discussed in more detail in Chapter 25.  
