# 35.6 INSURANCE DERIVATIVES  

When derivative contracts are used for hedging purposes, they have many of the same characteristics as insurance contracts. Both types of contracts are designed to provide protection against adverse events. It is not surprising that many insurance companies have subsidiaries that trade derivatives and that many of the activities of insurance companies are becoming very similar to those of investment banks.6  

Traditionally the insurance industry has hedged its exposure to catastrophic (CAT). risks such as hurricanes and earthquakes using a practice known as reinsurance. Reinsurance contracts can take a number of forms. Suppose that an insurance company has an exposure of $\$100$ million to earthquakes in California and wants to limit this to. $\$30$ million. One alternative is to enter into annual reinsurance contracts that cover on a pro rata basis $70\%$ of its exposure. If California earthquake claims in a particular year. total $\$50$ million, the cost to the company would then be only $\$15$ million. Another more popular alternative, involving lower reinsurance premiums, is to buy a series of reinsurance contracts covering what are known as excess cost layers. The first layer might provide indemnification for losses between $\$30$ million and $\$40$ million; the next. might cover losses between $\$40$ million and $\$50$ million; and so on. Each reinsurance. contract is known as an excess-of-loss reinsurance contract. The reinsurer has written a bull spread on the total losses. It is long a call option with a strike price equal to the lower end of the layer and short a call option with a strike price equal to the upper end. of the layer.'  

Some payouts on CAT risks have been very high. Hurricane Andrew in 1992 caused about $\$15$ billion of insurance costs in Florida. This exceeded the total of relevant insurance premiums received in Florida during the previous seven years. If Hurricane Andrew had hit Miami, it is estimated that insured losses would have exceeded $\$40$ billion. Hurricane Andrew and other catastrophes have led to increases in insurance/reinsurance premiums.  

The over-the-counter market has come up with a number of products that are alternatives to traditional reinsurance. The most popular is a CAT bond. This is a bond issued by a subsidiary of an insurance company that pays a higher-than-normal interest rate. In exchange for the extra interest the holder of the bond agrees to provide an excess-of-loss reinsurance contract. Depending on the terms of the CAT bond, the interest or principal (or both) can be used to meet claims. In the example considered above where an insurance company wants protection for California earthquake losses between $\$30$ million and $\$40$ million, the insurance company could issue CAT bonds with a total principal of. $\$10$ million. In the event that the insurance company's California earthquake losses exceeded $\$30$ million, bondholders would lose some or all of their principal. As an alternative the insurance company could cover this excess cost layer by making a much bigger bond issue where only the bondholders' interest is at risk.  
