---
tags:
  - asset_price_process
  - martingale
  - risk_neutral_pricing
  - risk_premium
  - stochastic_process
aliases:
  - Asset Price Drift
  - Changing Drift
  - Drift Adjustment
key_concepts:
  - Asset price stochastic process
  - Changing probability measure
  - Market price of risk
  - Risk-neutral pricing approach
  - Risk-return trade-off
---

# 15.6 CHANGING THE DRIFT OF AN ASSET PRICE PROCESS

We previously obtained the familiar stochastic process for an asset:

$$
\frac{d S_{t}}{S_{t}}=\alpha d t+\sigma d W_{t}.
$$

If we change $\mathbf{}\mathbf{}{W}_{t}$ such that now $\boldsymbol{W}_{t}=\boldsymbol{W}_{t}^{Q}+\gamma t$ , from Equation (15.29), then we can substitute its differential, $d\mathbf{W}_{t}=d\mathbf{W}_{t}^{Q}+\gamma d t$ , into Equation (15.33) to obtain

$$
\begin{array}{r}{\begin{array}{r c l}{\displaystyle\frac{d S_{t}^{Q}}{S_{t}^{Q}}=\alpha d t+\sigma(d W_{t}^{Q}+\gamma d t)}\ {\displaystyle}\ {=(\alpha+\sigma\gamma)d t+\sigma d W_{t}^{Q}.}\end{array}}\end{array}
$$

So if we change the probability measure for $\mathbf{}\mathbf{}{W}_{t}$ , which is the same probability that drives $S_{t}$ , we are now working with this new stochastic process and a new and different set of probabilities. But have we converted $S_{t}^{\mathrm{~Q~}}$ to a martingale? Well, not yet. If, however, we specify that $\gamma=-\alpha/\sigma$ , the drift becomes zero, leaving us with

$$
\frac{d S_{t}^{Q}}{S_{t}^{Q}}=\sigma d W_{t}^{Q},
$$

which is clearly a martingale. From this result, we can assign an obvious interpretation to. $\gamma=-\alpha/\sigma$ , an interpretation at which we have already arrived. First, ignoring the minus sign, the expression $\alpha$ in the numerator is the expected return. The denominator is clearly the risk. Thus, y is the return over the risk, which makes it a measure of a risk-return trade-off. It is somewhat more natural, however, to specify $\gamma$ in a slightly different manner:

$$
\gamma=-\frac{\alpha-r_{c}}{\sigma},
$$

which, when substituted back into the stochastic differential equation, gives us

$$
\frac{d S_{t}^{Q}}{S_{t}^{Q}}=r_{c}d t+\sigma d W_{t}^{Q}.
$$

Now we have a more natural interpretation of y. Again, ignoring the minus sign, the. numerator is the expected return minus the risk-free rate or the risk premium. The denominator is the risk.' In financial economics, this ratio is the risk premium per unit of risk. and is sometimes called the market price of risk. It reflects the relative risk-return trade-off, that is, the additional expected return necessary to induce investors to assume risk.10.

Now the adjustment is, more or less, just a subtraction of the risk premium per unit of risk, but the beauty of it all is that we never have to obtain the risk premium. By converting. the process to a martingale, we automatically remove the risk premium..

For the log process, recall that its drift, $\mu$ , is equal to. $\alpha-\sigma^{2}/2$ , so then11

$$
\gamma=-\frac{\mu+\sigma^{2}/2-r_{c}}{\sigma}.
$$

But if you have been paying close enough attention, you should note that it appears we no longer have $S_{t}$ in the form of a martingale. After all, its new expected return is.

$$
E\left(\frac{d S_{t}^{Q}}{S_{t}}\right)=r_{c}d t,
$$

which is typically not zero. With positive interest rates, we have now specified that the asset drifts upward at the risk-free rate. Now we seem to have a problem, but a slightly different spin on things saves the day.

First, we should be comforted in knowing that by removing the risk premium, we have taken out the most difficult part of the problem: the estimation of the risk premium for applied use or empirical research. There is an entire subdiscipline of financial economics called empirical asset pricing that is devoted to estimating risk premiums. We should be able to avoid this concern and solve the option pricing problem from what we now know, and indeed that is the case. Financial economists have long known that if we change the asset's expected return to the risk-free rate, we can then evaluate the expected option payoff. under the assumption that the asset price is randomly generated by the standard stochastic differential equation with a drift set at the risk-free rate. Economists then go on to explain that everything we need to know about how investors feel about risk is impounded into. the asset price. It is not necessary to reflect any effect of investors' risk preferences on the option price. Consequently, we can proceed to evaluate the option as if the expected return on the asset is the risk-free rate. This approach is often called risk-neutral pricing, and we have covered it previously. What we have done is equivalent to the well-known procedure of taking a short position in an option, hedging it with a long position in units. of the underlying asset, thereby eliminating the risk, followed by setting the return on this. hedged portfolio to the risk-free rate. From there we obtain a partial differential equation whose solution is the option pricing model. But how do we salvage our approach, which. now leaves us with $S_{t}$ no longer a martingale?

The trick lies in recognizing that we can work with the discounted value of $S_{t}$ In other. words, say we start off at time 0 with a value of $S_{0}$ . Then at time. $t.$ we have a new value, $S_{t}$ . But suppose we transform our asset price into its discounted value, $S_{t}e^{-r_{c}t}$ . Now let us. look at some of our previous results. Recall that the solution to the stochastic differential equation that gives us $S_{t}$ in terms of. $S_{0}$ was

$$
S_{t}=S_{0}e^{\mu t+\sigma W_{t}}.
$$

Suppose that instead of working with $S_{t}$ , we work with its discounted value,. $S_{t}e^{-r_{c}t}$ . Thend multiplying the previous equation by $e^{-r_{c}t}$ , we obtain

$$
S_{t}e^{-r_{c}t}=S_{0}e^{(\mu-r_{c})t+\sigma W_{t}}.
$$

Right now, however, we are under the original probability measure. Substituting $\mathbb{W}_{t}^{Q}+\gamma t$ for $\mathbb{W}_{t}$ , we obtain

$$
S_{t}e^{-r_{c}t}=S_{0}e^{(\mu-r_{c})t+\sigma(W_{t}^{Q}+\gamma t)}.
$$

Noting that we defined. $\gamma$ as $-(\mu-\sigma^{2}/2-r_{c})/\sigma$ and substituting this result, we obtain

$$
S_{t}e^{-r_{c}t}=S_{0}e^{-\sigma^{2}t/2+\sigma W_{t}^{Q}}.
$$

You may wish to look back to Chapter 12, Section 5, where we used this result for $S_{t}$ , along with the density function for a normally distributed $\mathbf{}\mathbf{}{W}_{t}$ to obtain the expected future asset price:

$$
E(S_{t})=S_{0}e^{(\mu+\sigma^{2}/2)t}.
$$

If we follow that same procedure here for $S_{t}e^{-r_{c}t}$ , we obtain

$$
E(S_{t}e^{-r_{c}t})=S_{0}e^{-\sigma^{2}t/2}e^{\sigma^{2}t/2}=S_{0}.
$$

The absence of a positive expected return shows that the discounted price is a martingale. Let us take one more step. We shall apply Ito's lemma to the discounted asset price. First, for simplicity of notation, let us use $S_{t}^{*}$ as $S_{t}e^{-r_{c}t}$ . Now applying Ito's lemma to $S_{t}^{*}$ we obtain

$$
d S_{t}^{*}=\frac{\partial S_{t}^{*}}{\partial W_{t}}d W_{t}+\frac{\partial S_{t}^{*}}{\partial t}d t+\frac{1}{2}\frac{\partial^{2}S_{t}^{*}}{\partial W_{t}^{2}}d W_{t}^{2}.
$$

Using Equation (15.41), we can obtain the partial derivatives:

$$
\begin{array}{l}{{\displaystyle{\frac{\partial S_{t}^{*}}{\partial W_{t}}}=S_{t}^{*}\sigma}}\ {{}}\ {{\displaystyle{\frac{\partial^{2}S_{t}^{*}}{\partial W_{t}^{2}}}=S_{t}^{*}\sigma^{2}}}\ {{}}\ {{\displaystyle{\frac{\partial S_{t}^{*}}{\partial t}}=S_{t}^{*}(\mu-r_{c}).}}\end{array}
$$

Substituting these results into Equation (15.46), and with $d\mathbb{W}_{t}^{2}=d t$ , we obtain the following stochastic differential equation for $S_{t}^{*}$

$$
\begin{array}{c}{\displaystyle\frac{d S_{t}^{*}}{S_{t}^{*}}=(\mu-r_{c}+\sigma^{2}/2)d t+\sigma d W_{t}}\ {=(\alpha-r_{c})d t+\sigma d W_{t}.}\end{array}
$$

We see that once we have taken the risk-free rate into effect in specifying the underlying. variable, we no longer account for the risk-free rate in the drift. But we still do not have a martingale. Recall that to obtain a martingale, we need to substitute. $d\mathbb{W}_{t}^{\underline{{Q}}}+\gamma t$ where $\gamma=-(\alpha-r_{c})/\sigma$ into Equation (15.48), giving us.

$$
\frac{d S_{t}^{*}}{S_{t}^{*}}=\sigma d\mathrm{\boldmath~\cal{W}~}_{t}^{Q},
$$

which is clearly a martingale, because there is no drift.

To summarize, we adjust the drift of the asset price process by changing the probabilities such that we obtain a martingale. What we also must do is to discount the asset price at the risk-free rate and then work with the discounted asset price to change the probability measure, leaving us with a martingale. Then we easily evaluate the option by applying the probability distribution of the discounted asset price to the option payoff. In this way the option price is found as the expected payoff of the option at expiration, without any discounting, because it has already been done.

If we do the one-discounting the asset price-without the other--changing the. measure-we have technically not completed the process, but as it turns out, we can get away with changing the measure without discounting the asset price. Recall that $d S_{t}/S_{t}=r_{c}d t+\sigma d{\mathrm{W}}_{t}$ . So, let us substitute $d\mathbb{W}_{t}^{Q}+\gamma d t$ and $\gamma=-(\alpha-r_{c})/\sigma$ to obtain

$$
\frac{d S_{t}}{S_{t}}=r_{c}d t+\sigma d\mathrm{W}_{t}^{Q}.
$$

We can work with this model and do the discounting later, that is, after we have evaluated the expected option payoff at expiration. That is because whether we discount before we have derived the expectation or after, we have not altered the fundamental process or the results of taking expectations other than by the simple linear adjustment, $e^{-r_{c}t}$ . Although mathematicians would probably prefer that we convert the asset price to a martingale, requiring that we do the discounting beforehand, financial economists would probably prefer to do the discounting afterwards. That is because the latter approach is more in line. with the intuition provided by economic theory: The price of any asset is its expected future value, discounted to the present at an appropriate rate. One typically finds the expectation first and then does the discounting. The fact that in this case the appropriate rate is the risk-free rate is quite intuitive. The risk has been removed via the risk-free hedge, or alternatively, the risk can be viewed as being fully imbedded into the price of the underlying asset and, therefore, cannot legitimately be incorporated again without double counting. Moreover, if the risk is either not present or removed, investors' risk preferences are irrelevant. to the valuation process. In that case, one might just as well use the simplest form of risk. preferences--risk neutrality---wherein investors discount future values at the risk-free rate..

Finally, we might just simply say that if the price of the underlying asset is given,. any two investors regardless of their feelings about risk will value the option in the same. manner. Consequently, we can treat both investors as though they had the simplest risk preferences of all, risk neutrality..
