# 1.4 SOME CAVEATS FOR WHAT IS TO FOLLOW  

A newcomer to financial engineering usually follows instincts that are harmful for good under standing of the basic methodologies in the field. Hence, before we start, we need to lay out some basic rules of the game that should be remembered throughout the book.  

1. This book is written from a market practitioner's point of view. Investors, pension funds, insurance companies, and governments are clients, and for us they are always on the other sis of the deal. In other words, we look at financial engineering from a trader's, broker's, and. dealer's angle. The approach is from the manufacturer's perspective rather than the viewpoint. of the user of the financial services. This premise is crucial in understanding some of the logic discussed in later chapters.  

2. We adopt the convention that there are two prices for every instrument unless stated otherwise. The agents involved in the deals often quote two-way prices. In economic theory, economic agents face the law of one price. The same good or asset cannot have two prices. If it did, we would then buy at the cheaper price and sell at the higher price.  

Yet for a market maker, there are two prices: one price at which the market participant is willing to buy something from you, and another one at which the market participant is willing to sell the same thing to you. Clearly, the two cannot be the same. An automobile dealer will buy a used car at a low price in order to sell it at a higher price. That is how the dealer makes money. The same is true for a market practitioner. A swap dealer will be willing to buy swaps at a low price in order to sell them at a higher price later.20 In the meantime, the instrument, just like the used car sold to a car dealer, is kept in inventories.  

3. It is important to realize that a financial market participant is not an investor and never has "money."' He or she has to secure funding for any purchase and has to place the cash generated by any sale. In this book, almost no financial market operation begins with a pile of cash. The only "cash' is in the investor's hands, which in this book is on the other side of the transaction.  

It is for this reason that market practitioners prefer to work with instruments that have. zero-value at the time of initiation. Such instruments would not require funding and are more practical to use.1 They also are likely to have more liquidity.  

4. The role played by regulators, professional organizations, and the legal profession is much more important for a market professional than for an investor. Although it is far beyond the scope of this book, many financial engineering strategies have been devised for the sole purpose of dealing with them.  

Remembering these premises will greatly facilitate the understanding of financial engineering.  
