---
tags:
  - bankruptcy_code
  - counterparty_risk
  - credit_valuation_adjustment
  - safe_harbor
  - swap_agreements
aliases:
  - CCR
key_concepts:
  - Bankruptcy code safe harbor
  - CVA charge
  - Net positive NPV exposure
  - Swap contract default risk
  - Terminate swap contracts
---

# 13.4 COUNTERPARTY CREDIT RISK  

Each counterparty to a swap contract bears the risk that the other will. default on its obligations. A crucial mitigant of this risk is the safe harbor of swaps agreements from the bankruptcy code. In the event of a default, most creditors cannot immediately act to recover amounts owed to them. For example, a bank with an outstanding commercial loan that is secured. by production machinery cannot, upon default, seize the collateral and sell it, and so recover the loan amount. Instead, the bank is subject to a bankruptcy stay. Under bankruptcy protection, the defaulting company is given time. to reorganize, during which it may continue to use its machinery. At some point, with the permission of the bankruptcy court, the bank's loan will be. paid off or restructured, possibly but not necessarily through the sale of the. bank's collateral. Swap agreements, however, under their safe harbor, are. not subject to the bankruptcy stay.1o More specifically, if one counterparty defaults on its obligations under a swap contract, the other counterparty may terminate that contract and any others included in a master agreement with the defaulting counterparty; may net receivables and payables under all contracts included in the master agreement; and may liquidate any posted. collateral under the agreement to cover swap closeout costs.  

Without the safe harbor, then, the surviving counterparty would have to. continue making the payments it owes, while no longer receiving payments. from the defaulting counterparty, until a court settled the matter. With the safe harbor, however, the surviving counterparty may terminate contracts. and stop making payments. Hence, the exposure to the surviving counterparty in the event of a default is the total NPV across all of the contracts with the defaulting counterparty. Put another way, any net positive NPV the surviving counterparty has against the defaulting counterparty is jeopardized by the default and termination of all trades. Furthermore, under the safe harbor, the surviving counterparty may recover potentially lost NPV by selling any collateral posted by the defaulting counterparty and, to the extent those proceeds are insufficient, may pursue an unsecured claim against the defaulting party through the courts. By the way, after a closeout, the surviving party must pay to settle any net negative NPV it has against the defaulting party.. The policy justification behind the derivatives safe harbor is that financial institutions, which are typically highly leveraged, could suffer great losses through a bankruptcy process in which they did not know their risk, because. they did not know which of their contracts would ultimately be honored and which would not.11 Since the financial crisis of 2007-2009, the safe. harbor has been narrowed somewhat to give a governmental authority time. to liquidate a failing, systemically important financial institution before its derivatives contracts are terminated, but that process is not explored further in this chapter.  

One way dealers have managed the counterparty credit risk from derivatives customers is by collecting a fee, or insurance premium, sometimes called a credit valuation adjustment (CVA) charge, that incorporates the likelihood of default and the potential exposure of the position. These fees, often imposed on the customer as a higher rate when paying fixed or as a lower rate when receiving fixed, constitute a reserve that can make up for losses from the few defaults that actually occur. This means of managing credit risk is particularly suitable for a diversified group of creditworthy clients that have neither ready sources of cash nor the operational infrastructure to post and monitor collateral.  

The predominant way dealers have managed counterparty credit risk, however, particularly when trading with professional investment firms, like asset managers and hedge funds, and with other dealers, is by taking collateral through variation margin (VM) and initial margin (IM).12 Calls for VM ensure that the counterparty with a positive NPV always holds sufficient collateral to cover a loss of that NPV, which, in this context, is sometimes called the current exposure of the swap. As an example, consider an IRS in which Counterparty A agrees to receive fixed from Counterparty B. At initiation, as discussed earlier, the NPV of a swap is zero. Now say that market interest rates fall such that Counterparty A has a positive NPV of $\$1$ million against Counterparty B. In that case, Counterparty B must post $\$1$ million of collateral to Counterparty A. Subsequently, however, rates rise dramatically, such that the NPV of the swap is positive. $\$2$ million to Counterparty B. Counterparty A must then return the $\$1$ million that Counterparty B had posted and send an additional $\$2$ million, so that now Counterparty B holds. total net collateral from Counterparty A equal to its positive NPV or current exposure. VM calls are typically made daily, though they can be more frequent in times of heightened market volatility..  

The VM arrangement described in the previous paragraph is now called VM collateralized-to-market (CTM), because of a recent change in margin arrangements for cleared IRS. For positions against a clearinghouse, IRS VM is now settled-to-market (STM), which means that VM flows are not collateral postings, but irrevocable cash settlements of daily profit or loss on the position, just like the daily settlement payments of futures contracts described in Chapter 11. Recasting the example in the previous paragraph under VM STM, after rates fall, Counterparty B pays $\$1$ million outright. to Counterparty A. After rates subsequently rise, Counterparty A pays $\$3$ million outright to Counterparty B. At that point, the NPV of the swap to Counterparty B is positive. $\$2$ million, but Counterparty B has already col-. lected a net of $\$2$ million from the VM STM payments.13.  

To complete the explanation of how VM protects the counterparty with positive NPV, continue the example by assuming that Counterparty A defaults right after its last VM payment. Under the safe harbor, Counterparty B tears up the swap with Counterparty A and, therefore, no longer receives or makes payments under that contract. Counterparty B needs to replace the contract, however, to restore the economics of the position before the default. Under VM CTM, Counterparty B relies again on the safe harbor to seize the net. $\$2$ million of collateral collected from. Counterparty A through the VM arrangement, and pays that $\$2$ million to. some Counterparty C to enter into a swap at the same terms as the swap just. canceled. By the definition of NPV - ignoring transactions costs, which are discussed further presently - Counterparty C is willing to receive fixed at a. below-market rate in a swap with a negative NPV of $\$2$ million in exchange. for a payment of. $\$2$ million. Lastly, Counterparty C immediately sends that. $\$2$ million back to Counterparty B as collateral against its newly acquired negative NPV. To emphasize that it is fair for Counterparty C to enter into. this swap, note that, while Counterparty C is receiving a below-market rate of interest, if rates remain constant, the NPV of the swap to Counterparty. C will gradually increase from. $-\$2$ million to 0, and Counterparty C will get back $\$2$ million of collateral that it never paid for. Put another way, by entering into this swap, Counterparty C essentially takes a position in a bond with a below-market coupon at a price of 98. The coupon is below market, but the price will increase to 100 at maturity..  

Under VM STM, Counterparty B collected a total of. $\$2$ million over time as the NPV of the swap rose to. $\$2$ million, but holds no collateral at. the time of default. Some Counterparty C again steps into the replacement swap, which receives a below-market rate and, consequently, has a negative NPV. Under VM STM, however, Counterparty C is responsible only for making payments arising from subsequent changes in NPV. Hence, there is no exchange of cash or collateral when Counterparty C enters into the swap under VM STM. Again, Counterparty C receives a below-market rate over. time, but, on average, settlement payments are positive as the NPV rises from $-\$2$ million to zero.  

While VM is sufficient to protect a positive NPV immediately after each. VM call, it does not protect changes in NPV between VM calls. Continuing with the example, say that rates rise again so that Counterparty B's NPV increases from $\$2$ million to $\$3$ million, and Counterparty A defaults before meeting its VM call. Counterparty B then has an exposure and possible loss of $\$1$ million. To protect against value changes between VM calls, each counterparty holds a certain amount of IM posted by the other. The amount of IM is typically set so as to cover a large market move plus the transaction and liquidity costs of replacing the defaulting positions. For example, statistical analysis might indicate that, with. $99\%$ statistical confidence, the swap between Counterparty A and Counterparty B will move by less than $\$5$ million before it can be replaced, and market expertise might. indicate that replacing a swap of its notional amount incurs an additional $\$250,000$ in transaction and market impact costs. The IM for the trade,. therefore, might be set at. $\$5,250,000$ In this way, so long as the change in NPV between VM calls is less than posted IM, each counterparty has enough collateral to replace defaulted positions. Continuing with the example in a VM CTM arrangement, Counterparty B seizes $\$1$ million of IM collateral,. which, together with the VM of. $\$2$ million is enough to pay Counterparty $\mathrm{C}$ to take on the now negative. $\$3$ million NPV position. The remaining $\$4,250,000$ of IM is returned to Counterparty A, the defaulting counterparty. In a VM STM arrangement, Counterparty B seizes. $\$1$ million of IM collateral, bringing the total collected to $\$3$ million, which is now the NPV of the swap to Counterparty B. The remaining IM is returned to Counterparty A. Some Counterparty C steps into the swap, facing a negative NPV, but with obligations to make only future VM STM payments.  

In general, collateral is posted in cash, in which case it earns some rate. of interest, or in safe securities, like government bonds, in which case the counterparty posting the collateral keeps the interest. Securities posted as collateral might be accepted only at a haircut, that is, at less than their market value, so as to reflect the price risk should they have to be liquidated in the event of a default. At a haircut of $3\%$ , for example, $\$100$ of securities count only as $\$97$ against collateral requirements. For cleared trades, the amount of IM to be posted is set and computed by the clearinghouse, and, for non-cleared trades, either using internal firm models or the industry standard initial margin model (SIMM). An important quantity in the determination of IM is the margin period of risk (MPOR), which is the assumed time interval over which a defaulted swap can be hedged or replaced. After a default, it is usual to hedge the replacement of the defaulted swap first and then - if desired - replace the actual swap with a willing counterparty and unwind the hedge. For example, say that Counterparty A defaults on its obligation  

to pay Counterparty B fixed at $2.34\%$ on a swap with a remaining maturity.   
of 12.3 years. Because it is likely to take some time to replace that particular.   
swap, Counterparty B should first hedge the exposure it lost on account of the default by receiving fixed on a Dv01-neutral amount of a 10-year swap at the prevailing market rate. Then, if desired, Counterparty B can.   
find a counterparty to replace the original swap - along the lines previously.   
discussed - and then, when the replacement swap is in place, unwind the.   
hedge. In any case, the longer the MPOR, the greater the assumed possible.   
changes in NPV before hedging or replacement, and the greater the required.   
IM to ensure that sufficient funds are available for hedging and replacing the.   
defaulted swap.  

Before the financial crisis of 2007-2009, nearly all IRS were traded overthe-counter (OTC) and managed bilaterally. OTC trading means that the parties arrange transactions on their own, without a third-party platform or exchange. And in bilateral trades, each pair of counterparties sets margin rules, exchanges collateral, and bears the risk of each other's default. While IRS played no appreciable role in the financial crisis,14 the Dodd-Frank Act. required that all relatively liquid swaps be traded on a swaps execution facility and be cleared. The clearinghouse then sets margin rules and manages collateral, as is described in greater detail in the next section. Dodd-Frank further required that margin be exchanged by counterparties to any swaps that are not cleared, and that all swaps transactions and positions be reported to regulators through swap data repositories. Dodd-Frank and its implementing regulations exempt nonfinancial, commercial end users, who are using. swaps to hedge, from clearing and margin requirements. This means, for example, that a nonfinancial corporation, which has neither the ability to fund margin calls nor the operational ability to manage the exchange of margin, can use a bilaterally arranged swap to hedge a debt issue, so long as it can find a willing dealer. As an aside, the business models of certain financial entities, like insurance companies and pension funds, are very suited to using IRS, but not to the liquidity demands of margin requirements.15 These entities, however, unless they are very small, are not exempt from clearing and margin requirements.  

The clearing requirement of Dodd-Frank resulted in the clearing of the. vast majority of IRS, which, until recently, were dominated by LIBOR swaps. At the time of this writing, SOFR swaps are relatively new and have not yet been deemed liquid enough for the clearing requirement to apply. Neverthe-. less, over $70\%$ of SOFR swaps are being cleared anyway, and the clearing. requirement is likely to be applied to them in 2022 or soon thereafter.16  
