---
cssclasses:
  - academia
title: The Eurocurrency and Eurobond Markets Annotations
tags:
  - eurobond_markets
  - eurocurrency_markets
  - international_markets
  - offshore_markets
  - trade_financing
aliases:
  - Eurobond
  - Eurocurrency
  - Euromarkets
  - Offshore Markets
key_concepts:
  - 'eurobond: international capital market'
  - 'eurocurrency: short-term borrowing'
  - 'eurodollar: dollar deposits outside US'
  - speculative positions
  - trade financing motive
---

# The Eurocurrency and Eurobond Markets Annotations

CHAPTER 12 THE EUROCURRENCY AND EUROBOND MARKETS

Eurocurrency markets are defined as banking markets which involve short-term borrowing and lending conducted outside of the legal jurisdiction of the authorities of the currency that is used. For example,  eurodollar deposits are dollar deposits held in London and Paris. The eurocurrency market has two sides to it: the receipt of deposits and the loaning out of those deposits. By far the most important eurocurrency is the eurodollar which currently accounts for approximately 60–65% of all eurocurrency activity,  followed by the euroeuro,  eurofrancs (Swiss),  eurosterling and euroyen. The use of the prefix 'euro' is somewhat misleading because dollar deposits held by banks in Hong Kong or Tokyo are equally outside the legal jurisdiction of the US authorities and also constitute eurodollar deposits. This more widespread geographical base means that euromarkets are often referred to as 'offshore' markets. 

The eurocurrency market is part of the international money market since it involves lending and borrowing for a period of less than a year. By contrast,  the Eurobond market is part of the international capital market and involves lending and borrowing for periods of more than a year. A Eurobond is a bond that is sold by a government,  institution or company in a currency that is different from the country where the bond is issued. For example,  a dollar bond sold in London is a dollar Eurobond,  and a sterling bond sold in Germany is a sterling Eurobond

12.2 PARTICIPANTS IN THE EUROCURRENCY AND EUROBOND MARKETS

There are numerous participants in the international money and capital markets,  including national governments; local authorities; and financial institutions – such as banks,

multinational firms,  companies and international institutions,  such as the International Monetary Fund,  the World Bank and the European Investment Bank – as well as private investors. Most industrialized countries' participants act both as lenders and borrowers of funds,  while many developing countries use the markets almost exclusively for borrowing purposes. The various types of [[Chapter 14- Capital Flows and the Current Account|capital flows]] between economic agents of different countries are motivated by various factors; these include:

1. Trade financing motive: much trade is financed by borrowing on the international money and capital markets;
1. Borrowing/lending motive: many [[Chapter 14- Capital Flows and the Current Account|capital flows]] are simply motivated by the desire of savers to get the best possible return on their money,  while borrowers are merely seeking to obtain the lowest possible interest rate;
1. Speculative motive: much borrowing or lending is due to the taking of speculative positions based on profiting from prospective interest rate and exchange rate changes;
1. Hedging motive: much borrowing and lending is motivated by a desire to hedge positions; that is,  to avoid losses resulting from prospective interest rate and exchange rate changes;
1. Capital flight motive: many movements of capital are motivated by a desire to protect investors' funds from penal taxation,  possible seizure by the domestic government or to escape potential restrictions being imposed on convertibility or to avoid political risk.

The vast majority of loans made by the eurobanks to the developing countries in the 1970s and early 1980s were made by syndicates of eurobanks. A syndicate is normally led by a lead or managing bank,  with other banks that wish to participate in a loan contributing to its funding. Such [[Moody's Syndicated Bank Loans 2006 Default Review and 2007 Outlook|Syndicated Loans]] are useful from the perspective of individual eurobanks because they reduce the exposure of a eurobank to a given borrower,  and by participating in a wide range of [[Moody's Syndicated Bank Loans 2006 Default Review and 2007 Outlook|Syndicated Loans]] a eurobank can diversify and reduce its loan risks far more than by engaging in a limited number of large individual loans. A final factor behind the growth of eurobanking activity has been the rapid growth of world trade,  which means that more companies have excess working balances in a foreign currency on which they seek high rates of return,  while others require short-term borrowing facilities at competitive rates of interest.

12.4 THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE EURODOLLAR MARKET

Eurobanks are generally free of government regulation,  and more specifically they do not face compulsory reserve requirements,  interest ceilings or deposit insurance. The main users of the eurocurrency market facilities are the eurobanks themselves,  noneurobank financial institutions,  multinational corporations,  international institutions,  and central and local government. Multinationals are attracted by the relatively high interest rates paid on their surplus corporate funds and the competitive borrowing rates. International organizations such as the World Bank frequently borrow funds from eurobanks for lending to developing countries. A large proportion of eurocurrency transactions are between eurobanks themselves,  those with surplus funds loaning to eurobanks that have lending possibilities but are short of funds. The pivotal rate of interest for the eurocurrency markets is the London Interbank Offer Rate ( [[A Guide to the Front End and Basis Swap Markets#London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)|LIBOR]] ),  which is the rate of interest that London clearing banks will charge for loans between themselves on the

London interbank market. Non-bank borrowers then pay a spread above  [[A Guide to the Front End and Basis Swap Markets#London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)|LIBOR]]  depending on their credit rating and the lending bank's transaction costs; non-bank depositors typically receive a rate of interest on their deposits below LIBOR. In the early days of the euromarket,  the interest paid on deposits and charged for loans was usually fixed for the whole period of the deposit or loan. Increasingly,  however,  floating interest rates based on  [[A Guide to the Front End and Basis Swap Markets#London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)|LIBOR]]  have become the norm for mediumto long-term (above six months) deposits and loans. With floating rates,  the interest charged on a mediumto long-term loan is adjusted every three or six months to stay a fixed spread above LIBOR. In effect,  many long-term loans are a succession of short-term loans that are automatically 'rolled over',  but at interest rates that vary in line with changes in  [[A Guide to the Front End and Basis Swap Markets#London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)|LIBOR]] . There are usually penalties to be paid if deposits are withdrawn before maturity One of the interesting characteristics of the structure of eurobank assets (loans) and liabilities (deposits) is that they are predominately of a short-term nature with some deposits being as short as one day (overnight deposit) and the vast majority under six months Furthermore,  there is a close matching of the maturity structure of deposits and liabilities. Typically,  if money is taken in for three (six) months then it will be loaned out for three (six) months. This is because eurobanks have to be wary of sudden large withdrawals of shortterm funds.

12.5 THE COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE OF EUROBANKS

The main reason for the continuing success of eurobanking,  despite the relaxation of regulation on US banks,  is that they are able to offer higher deposit rates and lower loan rates than US banks.

The eurobanks are generally able to pay a higher rate on deposits and charge a lower rate for loans than US banks can for similar facilities. This implies that the interest rate spread,  that is,  the difference between the rate paid on deposits and charged for loans,  is lower for the eurobanks than US banks. The lower euro-interest spread can be accounted for by a number of factors:

1. Eurobanks,  unlike domestic banks,  are free of regulatory control and in particular they are not required to hold reserve assets. This gives them a competitive advantage over domestic banks which are required to hold part of their assets in zero or low-interest liquid assets to meet official reserve requirements. Since eurobanks are not subject to reserve requirements they are able to hold less money in the form of low-interest reserves,  enabling them to pay a higher interest rate on deposits and charge a lower rate on loans. For example,  up until 1990 the Federal Reserve imposed a 3% reserve requirement on US banks so that for every$100 taken in only$97 could be lent out,  on an interest rate of 10%,  which amounts to the need to charge 10.31% to cover the cost of the reserves.
1. Eurobanks benefit from economies of scale; the average size of their deposits and loans (hundreds of thousands and usually millions of dollars) is considerably greater than those of domestic banks (usually tens,  hundreds and thousands of dollars). This means the average operating cost associated with each dollar deposit and loan transaction is much lower for eurobanks.
1. Eurobanks avoid much of the personnel,  administration costs and delays associated with complying with domestic banking regulations. Eurobanks do not have to maintain a large branch network for their business,  whereas domestic banking activity usually requires the maintenance of an extensive branch network. In addition,  domestic banks need extensive internal control mechanisms and large costly legal departments,  whereas eurobanks have far less need for these.
1. The eurobanking business is highly competitive internationally with relatively easy entrance requirements as compared to domestic banking activity,  which encourages greater efficiency and more competitive pricing on the part of eurobanks.
1. Eurobanks do not have to pay deposit insurance whereas US banks have to insure their deposit base with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
1. Eurobank lending is almost exclusively to high-quality customers with a virtually negligible default rate,  which contrasts with the relatively high default rates faced by domestic banks that have to charge an appropriate default risk premium in the way of higher lending rates and lower deposit rates of interest.

12.6 THE COEXISTENCE OF DOMESTIC AND EUROBANKING 

12.8 THE PROS AND CONS OF THE EUROCURRENCY MARKETS

One of the major concerns expressed about eurocurrency markets is that they have enormous amounts of funds and the potential to create credit and yet remain unregulated. Some argue that eurobanking activity is a ticking time-bomb underneath the world financial system. The fact that eurobanks are not regulated and do not have access to lender-of-last-resort facilities,  combined with the high degree of interbank activity,  has led to concerns that the failure of one eurobank would have serious knockon effects on other eurobanks and in so doing endanger the entire international financial system. Another concern expressed about the euromoney markets is their potential impact on inflation. The rapid growth of the eurocurrency markets in the 1960s and 1970s coincided with a pronounced rise in the inflation rates of the industrialized nations. Some policy-makers and economists argued that eurocurrency market growth was partly responsible for this. The basis of the argument was that the growth of eurocurrency markets with no reserve requirements had an expansionary effect on national money supplies and thereby helped to fuel inflation rates.

eurocurrency markets have increased the range of facilities available to both borrowers and lenders. In addition,  they do so at very [[Chapter 3-Comparative Advantage, Competitiveness, and the Terms of Trade|competitive]] rates of interest. They have not only facilitated financial transfers between private economic agents,  but also between countries enabling them to finance [[Chapter 14- Capital Flows and the Current Account|current account]] deficits with somewhat greater ease than before the euromarkets existed

12.10 THE INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL MARKET AND THE EUROBOND MARKET

The international capital market is a longer-term market than the eurocurrency market,  in which borrowers and lenders of funds from different countries are brought together to exchange funds. The international capital market is made up of three markets: (1) the domestic bond market,  (2) the foreign bond market and (3) the Eurobond market. A domestic bond is a bond issued in the currency of the country of issue by a domestic entity; for example,  a US dollar Treasury bond issued by the US Treasury or a dollar corporate bond issued by a US corporation in the United States. A foreign bond is a bond issued by a foreign entity in the domestic currency of the country of issue. An example of this would be a British company that issues a dollar bond in the US market – such a foreign bond is known as a Yankee. Other foreign bonds have names symbolizing the country whose currency is being borrowed,  such as Bulldogs for sterling bonds,  Samurais for yen bonds and Matadors for Spanish euro-denominated bonds. A Eurobond is a bond that is sold by a government,  institution or company in a currency different from the country where the bond is issued. For example,  a dollar bond sold in London is a dollar Eurobond,  and a sterling bond sold in Luxembourg is a sterling Eurobond

12.11 THE ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE EUROBOND MARKET

The first Eurobond was issued in 1963 and since then the market has grown enormously,  particularly during the 1980s and 1990s. The Eurobond market dates back to the imposition of the Interest Equalization Tax (IET) by the US authorities on US citizens that held dollar bonds issued by foreign entities in the United States. The US authorities imposed the tax because of concern about the long-term outflow of capital on the US balance of payments. By reducing the attractiveness to US investors of investing in foreign bonds,  the tax provided a stimulus for foreign entities to issue US dollar bonds outside of the United States A further incentive for the development of the Eurobond market was that the US authorities also imposed withholding taxes on foreign citizens that held US bonds,  which meant that foreign citizens had a clear incentive to hold Eurobonds that were not subject to taxation by the US authorities.

Growth in the 1980s was partly stimulated by the fact that corporations found banks increasingly reluctant to lend funds due to problems stemming from the debt crisis in the developing world. Furthermore,  many corporations realized that they could exploit their credit ratings,  which were often as good if not better than some of the banks that they had traditionally borrowed funds from,  especially as they increasingly deemed the rates of interest and security requirement of banks to be excessive. In addition,  many corporations found that banks were reluctant to lend at fixed rates of interest at the longer time horizons that corporations were interested in. The major advantage of a Eurobond issue over domestic and foreign bond issues is that there are less stringent regulatory and disclosure requirements on the corporate issuer

and that a greater variety of different bond types can be issued In summary,  the Eurobond market generally means lower-cost finance for well-known companies than borrowing directly from banks or the domestic bond market.

Most (approximately 75%) Eurobond issues are undertaken by very highly rated institutions with AAA and AA credit ratings. The market is used extensively by governments,  international organizations such as the World Bank,  the European Investment Bank and multinational corporations Some issuers use the market to raise funds in currencies they do not wish ultimately to hold but as part of a swap deal Eurobonds come in a variety of forms,  and the most common type are known as straights,  which pay fixed rates of interest with repayment of principal upon maturity. Increasingly popular are floating-rate notes which are Eurobonds on which the interest rate is adjusted every three to six months in line with changes in a key interest rate such as LIBOR. Floating-rate issues are especially popular with banks that wish to invest surplus funds,  since the floating rate of interest means that the capital value of the bond is largely unaffected by interest rate movements. A convertible bond gives the owner the right to convert the bond into ordinary shares in the issuing company at a predetermined price sometime in the future. Convertible bonds usually pay a belowmarket rate of interest with holders attracted by the potential gain on the possibility of a share price conversion Some Eurobonds have a warrant attached that gives the holder the right to buy shares in the company at a predetermined price in the future; the warrants can be detached from the bond and traded separately. 

The bearer form of most Eurobond issues is a particular attraction for international investors who like to avoid open registration of their ownership (although they are legally obliged to reveal coupon earnings to their tax authorities,  this may not always happen!) Another attraction of Eurobond issues for investors is that they are free of withholding taxes and this means that investors can save on paperwork when seeking to avoid double taxation on their interest income. The typical Eurobond investor has been characterized as a 'Belgian dentist',  an investor who wishes to earn a little bit more interest than is available on government bonds but who also wants a very safe investment and is hence attracted by the high credit rating of most Eurobond issuers. 

12.13 CONTROL AND REGULATION OF THE EUROBOND MARKET

Eurobonds are generally exempt from the rules and regulations that govern the issue of foreign bonds in a country; for example,  the need to issue very detailed prospectuses and withholding taxes (taxes on nonresidents which are deducted at source).

Despite the fact that the Eurobond market is by definition outside the legal jurisdiction of the country of the currency of issue,  this does not mean that the national authorities of the currency in question are unable to exert significant influence on it. National governments have always exerted control on national capital markets for a number of reasons; the most important is that they are usually huge borrowers themselves,  they are keen to encourage scarce domestic capital to be invested in domestic bond issues and they are also concerned about possible tax avoidance and the impact of outflows of capital on the value of their currency. Governments still have a number of means of controlling the issue of Eurobonds in their national currencies. Firstly,  most clearance of funds raised in Eurobond issues is done through the clearing system of the domestic banking system of the currency in question,  giving the central bank of that currency the ability to prohibit issues if it so wishes Secondly,  governments can exert pressure on both domestic investment banks and foreign investment banks not to participate in Eurobond issues with the implicit threat of losing government business and ultimately their licence to operate in their country. The Swiss authorities have effectively prevented Eurobond issues in Swiss francs,  requiring all Swiss franc issues to be done in Switzerland,  and the Japanese have managed to exert strong control over Eurobond issues in yen.

12.14 THE MANAGEMENT OF A EUROBOND ISSUE

| Amount: |$100 million-$4,    000 million. |
| ---- | ---- |
| Issuers: | Governments,     international organisations eg: the World Bank,     the European Investment Bank,     banks/financial institutions and major corporations with AAA,     AA,     A credit ratings accounting for approximately 75% of all corporate issues. |
| Maturity: | Normally 10 years or less. |
|  | Most issues being in the 4-7 year range. |
| Principal: | Typically repayable in full upon maturity"bullet form"). Occasionally some issues have the principal repayable in stages over the life of the bond and sometimes the principal repayable linked to movements in a market index such as the Nikkei or Standard & Poor 500. |
| Coupon: | Payable annually. Vast majority are "straights,     that is,     at a fixed coupon. Approximately a quarter of issues are at a variable coupon linked to a spread over  [[A Guide to the Front End and Basis Swap Markets#London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)|LIBOR]]  (or some other benchmark) known as floating rate notes. |
| Yield: | Spread over US Treasury bonds depends on credit rating. |
|  | AAA governments around 10-20 basis points |
|  | AAA corporates around 20-40 basis points |
|  | AA governments around 30-50 basis points |
|  | AA corporates around<br><br>40-80 basis points |
|  | A governments around 50-100 basis points |
|  | A Corporates around<br><br>80-110 basis points |
|  | BBB around 120+ basis points |
|  | The above margins are only indicative and they can quite easily change substantially depending on market conditions and the date to maturity. |
| Security: | Usually senior unsecured debt (i.e. high priority in caseclosure of the business). In some instances,     the bond is backed by letter of credit or other collateral such as outstanding company assets. |
| Form: | Bearer form. Holder is deemed to be owner and the anonymity is one of the attractions to investors. |
| Tax status: | The bonds are issued free of withholding taxes. |
| Listing: | London or Luxembourg |
| Denominations: |$1,    000,    $5,    000,    $10,    000 |
| Special Features: | Many bonds have call back features typically after 5 years,     some have warrants attached and others can be converted into equity at a predetermined price. |

A typical Eurobond issue involves the formation of three groups: (i) the management group,  (ii) the underwriting syndicate and (iii) the selling group. The issue is handled on behalf of a client by a lead or managing bank,  and where the deal involves a particularly large sum of money other co-managers may be appointed. The lead manager and comanagers together form the management group The borrower and the lead bank will have initial discussions concerning the currency of issue,  the amount and terms at which the borrower would like to raise funds The next stage involves appointing an underwriting syndicate of typically between 10 and 200 banks/securities houses to underwrite the issue so that the issuer is guaranteed the funds. The underwriting group which also includes the banks from the management group has the additional task of assisting in the placing of the issue with Eurobond investors. A final group,  which comprises the management group and the underwriting syndicate plus other selected banks,  form the selling group whose task is to place the issue with Eurobond investors. A typical Eurobond issue is partly placed with institutional investors and partly with private investors,  with the latter usually accounting for around a half of the value of the issue. A few weeks or sometimes days prior to an issue being placed on the market a 'red herring' prospectus is issued that sets out the likely features of the bond which is used by the selling group to canvass interest in the issue. In some cases,  the bond trades in a 'grey market' which is a short-term forward market that gives prospective investors an opportunity to see the likely trading range for the market price of the issue. The selling group,  on the basis of feedback from potential investors,  will return to the issuer to 'fine tune' the issue,  adjusting the final terms so as to meet some of the prospective investors' demands. Once the terms of the issue are finalized,  the selling group will commit itself to buying the entire issue at a discount to the offer price and a final prospectus is printed and distributed to potential investors Competition between members of the selling group is fierce and it may well be the case that different investors are able to buy the bonds at different prices,  often at a discount to the offer price stated in the prospectus. Lead managers are expected to ensure,  using their own funds if necessary,  an orderly primary and secondary market in the issue; failure to do so would adversely affect their reputation in the Eurobond market. Unlike domestic bond markets,  the secondary market in Eurobonds is relatively 'thin' and most Eurobond investors tend to hold the issue right through to maturity. Nonetheless,  for some of the very large issues with well-known issuers,  the secondary market can be reasonably active,  and Eurobond market-makers quote bid–offer prices The bid–offer spread in the Eurobond market can typically range from 30 to 50 basis points,  which contrasts with the spread for US Treasury bonds which,  because of the greater liquidity,  is typically less than 5 basis points The lead bank and the underwriting syndicate charge the client for both managing,  placing and underwriting the issue. On occasions,  the underwriting syndicate will actually purchase part or all of the issue and then hopefully place it with clients at a higher price and thus make a profit. A typical fee structure involves 20% of fees going to the management group,  20% to the underwriting group and 60% to the selling group.

The total fee as a percentage of the value of the issue is usually in the range of 0.5 to 2% depending upon the complexity and degree of difficulty of placing the issue. Competition for Eurobond business is extremely fierce,  particularly as banks are keen to appear highly placed in the Eurobond league tables In some Eurobond issues the management group may even confine all three tasks to itself so as to maximize its fee earnings.

12.15 INNOVATIONS IN THE EUROBOND MARKET

The first Eurobond issues were in the form of 'straights',  that is,  borrowing at a fixed rate of interest; but the market has since developed so that many Eurobond issues now have innovative features. These days a good proportion (around a quarter) of Eurobond issues are floating-rate notes; and another major innovation is that many recent Eurobond issues are denominated in the euro. Other innovations include the issue of convertible Eurobonds whereby the investor has the right to convert the bond into shares in the company at a predetermined price Some Eurobonds are issued with warrants attached which can be traded separately,  giving the holder the right to buy shares at a predetermined price. Many Eurobond issues also have a 'call-back' feature which enables the issuer to buy back the issue should it wish to do so (a particularly useful feature if the borrower's cash flow turns out to be better than expected or if interest rates decline sufficiently). More recently,  in some Eurobond issues the principal to be returned to the investor is linked to movements in a broad equity market index such as the Nikkei 225. Another recent innovation is asset-backed Eurobonds; with these,  illiquid assets such as the outstanding loans of a bank are sold in the form of a Eurobond promising to pay a given coupon based on the income from the outstanding loans. Such bonds can still have a AAA rating because the bond will typically be overcollateralized,  that is,  backed up by loans with a face value considerably higher than that of the bond,  so,  even if allowance is made for default on some of the outstanding loans,  the Eurobond investor can expect to receive full payment.

In many ways,  the Eurobond market has the potential to provide a valuable source of funding for emerging-market governments,  although such borrowers are of a higher risk than traditional Eurobond borrowers. All of these innovative features,  as well as the fact that interest is paid once a year and that the liquidity of Eurobonds is lower compared to Treasury bonds,  make it quite difficult to compare the yields on Eurobonds with standard Treasury and [[Class Notes 2 – Corporate Bond Contracts|Corporate Bonds]]. Nonetheless,  a typical Eurobond offers a premium over the standard Treasury bond of between 30 to 150 basis points depending on the credit rating of the issuer. More importantly,  from the viewpoint of the issuer the typical cost savings of a Eurobond issue compared to a domestic bond issue can range from 25 to 200 basis points.
