---
tags:
  - cash_settled
  - cme
  - hedging
  - interest_rate_risk
  - sofr_futures
aliases:
  - SER
  - SOFR futures
  - one-month SOFR
key_concepts:
  - CME trading
  - Cash settlement
  - Delivery month
  - Hedging interest rate risk
  - SOFR futures contract
---

# 12.2 ONE-MONTH SOFR FUTURES  

The one-month SOFR futures contract, which trades on the CME (Chicago. Mercantile Exchange), is designed to take and hedge exposure to SOFR or to. other rates believed to be highly correlated with SOFR. Selected one-month SOFR contracts, along with their prices and rates as of January 14, 2022, are given in Table 12.2. Each ticker is composed of the code "SER," a letter indicating the contract month, and a digit corresponding to the last digit of the contract year. For example, with. $^{\circ\circ}\mathrm{G}^{\mathfrak{N}}$ standing for February, SERG2 is. the ticker for the one-month SOFR contract of February 2022. Its current price is 99.935, which corresponds to a percentage rate of $100-99.935$ , or 0.065. Expressing the percentage rate as 100 minus price is just a convention:. there is no sense in which the price of a particular bond or other instrument at a rate of $0.065\%$ equals 99.935.4  

TABLE 12.2 Selected One-Month SOFR Futures Contracts, as of January 14, 2022. Rates Are in Percent.   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Ticker</td><td>Month</td><td>Price</td><td>Rate</td></tr><tr><td>SERF2</td><td>Jan</td><td>99.9475</td><td>0.0525</td></tr><tr><td>SERG2</td><td>Feb</td><td>99.935</td><td>0.065</td></tr><tr><td>SERH2</td><td>Mar</td><td>99.815</td><td>0.185</td></tr><tr><td>SERJ2</td><td>Apr</td><td>99.685</td><td>0.315</td></tr><tr><td>SERK2</td><td>May</td><td>99.585</td><td>0.415</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Each contract trades until the last business day of the month in which it expires, known as its delivery month. The word "delivery" here is a carryover from other futures contracts, which, at expiration, require the delivery of an underlying commodity or financial instrument in exchange for some payment. SOFR contracts, however, are cash settled; that is, they require no physical delivery at expiration.  

The final settlement rate of a one-month SOFR contract equals the average SOFR rate over that month. Each day of the month is included in the average, and non-business days take the rate of the previous business day. For example, the SOFR rate for Friday, February 4, 2022, is counted three times in the February average: once for Friday, February 4; once for Saturday, February 5th; and once for Sunday, February 6th. The final settlement price of a contract equals 100 minus the percentage rate. If, for example, the average SOFR rate over the month of February 2022 is $0.09\%$ , then the final settlement price is $100-0.09$ , 0r 99.91.5  

The one-month SOFR contract is scaled to hedge a. $\$5$ million 30-day investment. More specifically, the. $\mathrm{P}\&\mathrm{L}$ (profit and loss) on one contract from. a one-basis-point decrease in the contract's rate is set equal to,  

$$
\$000,0000\times0.01\%\times{\frac{30}{360}}=\S41.67
$$  

To elaborate on the $\mathrm{P}\&\mathrm{L}$ from buying, holding, and selling this futures. contract, consider a trader that buys one February contract on January 14, 2022, at a price of 99.935, which corresponds to a rate of. $0.065\%$ . Say further that the price falls to 99.910, or equivalently, that the rate rises to $0.09\%$ , and that the trader either sells the contract or that the contract. expires at those levels. Because the trader bought the contract and the price.  

fell, the trader loses money. The actual loss is determined with reference to Equation (12.2). Because the contract rate rose from $0.065\%$ to $0.09\%$ , that is, by 2.5 basis points, the trader loses 2.5 times $\$41.67$ , or $\$104.175$ . If, the price rises instead, the buyer of a contract makes money. More specifically, if the price rises from 99.935 to 99.995, or, equivalently, the rate falls by six basis points, then the P&L from the purchase of one contract is six times $\$41.67$ , or $\$250.02$  

Like other futures contracts, one-month SOFR contracts are subject. to daily settlement payments. Futures prices fluctuate throughout the day,. according to market forces, and, at the end of each day, the exchange. sets a settlement price, which usually equals the price of the last trade. All market participants then settle up their gains and losses over the day.. Those who were long one-month SOFR contracts over the day pay $\$41.67$ for every one-basis-point increase in rates over the day or receive. $\$41.67$ for every one-basis-point decrease in rates over the day. Correspondingly, those who are were short over the day receive. $\$41.67$ for every one-basis-point increase in rates or pay. $\$41.67$ for every one-basis-point decrease in rates.6.  

Because of daily settlement payments, the. $\mathrm{P}\&\mathrm{L}$ of a futures position is realized over its holding period rather than all at unwind or at final settlement. In one of the previous examples the February contract is bought on January 14 at a rate of $0.065\%$ and expires or is sold at a rate of. $0.005\%$ for a six-basis-point or $\$250.02$ gain. That gain is realized over time: daily. settlement payments are made on days when rates rise and are received on days when rates fall. The sum of all those daily settlement payments, how-. ever, corresponds to the overall six-basis-point decline in rates, that is, to an overall profit of. $\$250.02$ . The exact pattern of gains and losses over the. holding period does not matter much when interest rates are very low, as they have been for several years. In higher rate environments, however, the pattern does matter. For winning positions, early gains, which can be reinvested, can be worth significantly more than later gains. Similarly, for losing positions, early losses, which have to be financed, can cost significantly more than later losses. The implications of daily settlement are discussed further presently.  

The stage is now set for a simple example of hedging with one-month. SOFR contracts. Consider a money market fund that plans to invest. $\$50$ million from January 14 to March 14, 2022, in overnight repo. The fund chooses overnight repo because of its liquidity, that is, its ready availability in the contingency of larger than anticipated requests to redeem shares. At the same time, however, the fund decides to hedge the interest rate risk of falling. repo rates with one-month SOFR futures. More specifically, to offset losses from falling repo rates, the fund buys one-month SOFR futures contracts, which profit from falling repo rates. The question for the fund then, is which contracts and how many to buy.  

Focusing first on hedging the risk of falling repo rates over the month of February, the fund can buy February contracts. Because each contract is scaled to hedge a $\$5$ million 30-day investment, while the fund is investing $\$50$ million over the 28-day month of February, the fund needs to buy,  

$$
\frac{\S50,000,000\times28}{\S5,000,000\times30}=10\times\frac{28}{30}=9.33
$$  

contracts. Under a few simplifying assumptions, discussed presently, the performance of this hedge is described in Table 12.3. The first column gives the average realized rate over the month of February. The second column gives the investment proceeds from earning simple interest in repo over the month of February. At an average repo rate of $0.09\%$ , for example, the fund earns $\$50$ million $\times0.09\%\times28/360=\mathbb{\S}3.500$ . The third column gives the P&L. from being long 9.33 contracts. Taking again the realized average rate of $0.09\%$ , which is 2.5 basis points above the purchase rate of. $0.065\%$ , the long futures position loses. $9.33\times2.5\times41.67=\S971.95$ . The fourth col-. umn gives the net proceeds, that is, the sum of the investment proceeds and the $\mathrm{P}\&\mathrm{L}$ from the SOFR futures hedge. The hedge works well in the sense that, no matter what the realized average rate, net proceeds are about the same. To elaborate, buying SOFR futures at a rate of. $0.065\%$ approximately locks in a net. $\mathrm{P}\&\mathrm{L}$ of $\$2,528$ . If the realized repo rate is less than. $0.065\%$ , investment proceeds are less, but futures $\mathrm{P}\&\mathrm{L}$ profits compensate for the difference. If the realized repo rate is greater than $0.065\%$ , investment proceeds are greater, but futures. $\mathrm{P}\&\mathrm{L}$ losses offset the difference. The. reader can verify that the hedge works perfectly, that is, net proceeds always equal $\$2,527.78$ , under the contrafactual assumptions that: i) the fund buys exactly 9 1/3 contracts, which is the exact solution of Equation (12.3); and ii) the P&L of the futures contract is exactly. $\$412/3$ per basis point, which. is the exact expression in Equation (12.2)..  

TABLE 12.3Hedging a $\$50$ Million Overnight Repo Investment with. 9.33 One-Month February SOFR Futures Contracts, Purchased at a Rate of $0.065\%$ , as of January 14, 2022. Rates and in Percent. Other. Entries Are in Dollars..   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Realized Avg. Rate</td><td>Investment Proceeds</td><td>Futures P&L</td><td>Net Proceeds</td></tr><tr><td>0.050</td><td>1,944.44</td><td>583.17</td><td>2,527.62</td></tr><tr><td>0.065</td><td>2,527.78</td><td>0.00</td><td>2,527.78</td></tr><tr><td>0.090</td><td>3,500.00</td><td>-971.95</td><td>2,528.05</td></tr></table></body></html>  

The depiction of the hedge in Table 12.3 is simplified in several ways. First, the fund has to buy a whole number of contracts, that is, nine (or 10) rather than 9.33. This is less of an issue, of course, for larger hedges, and another practical solution to this rounding problem is discussed presently. Second, the table ignores interest on daily settlement payments, which is negligible when rates are very low and the time horizon is short. Third, it is assumed that investment proceeds earn simple interest, whereas interest is more likely to compound. This effect, too, is small when rates are low and the horizon short. Fourth, the table assumes that the average repo rate that determines the fund's investment proceeds is exactly the same as the average SOFR rate that determines the final settlement rate of the futures contract. While extremely reasonable, this assumption may not hold exactly in practice. SOFR on any day is the trimmed median rate of all transactions that day. The fund, on the other hand, executes its own repo transactions each day at a particular time with a particular dealer.  

Stepping back to the full example, the money market fund wants to. hedge its overnight repo investments from January 14 to March 14. The hedge over February is described above. Turning to the hedge over the month of January, note that SOFR observations for the first 13 days of. January have already been set. Therefore, a one-basis-point change to repo. rates over each of the remaining 18 days of January moves average SOFR. for the month by only 18/31 basis points. Similarly, the fund is investing in repo over only 18 days in January. The correct number of contracts for the hedge is, therefore,  

$$
\frac{\left.\mathbb{S}50,000,000\times0.01\mathcal{U}\times\frac{18}{360}\right.}{\left.\mathbb{S}5,000,000\left(0.01\mathcal{U}\times\frac{18}{31}\right)\times\frac{30}{360}}=10\times\frac{31}{30}=10.33
$$  

In words, because the number of remaining days in the month affects the. investment proceeds and the futures contract in the same way, the fact that the hedge starts in the middle of the month can be ignored. Therefore, just as in Equation (12.3) for the February hedge, the number of contracts for. the January hedge is the investment of $\$50$ million for 31 days divided. by the contract's effective hedge of. $\$5$ million for 30 days, which equals. 10 times 31/30, or 10.33. Table 12.4 illustrates the January hedge, noting. that SOFR over each of the first 13 days of January was five basis points. The format of the table is similar to that of Table 12.3, but the first column. is the average repo rate over the whole month, which determines the. futures P&L, while the second column is the average repo rate over the last 18 days of the month, which determines the investment proceeds. From the first row, for example, the first 13 days at five basis points and the last 18 days at 2.85 basis points give an average over the month of $(5\times13+2.85\times18)/31=3.7$ basis points.  

TABLE 12.4Hedging a $\$50$ Million Overnight Repo Investment with 10.33 One-Month January SOFR Futures Contracts, Purchased at a Rate of $0.0525\%$ , as of January 14, 2022. SOFR Was $0.05\%$ on Every Day from January 1 to 13. Rates Are in Percent. Other Entries Are in Dollars.   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Jan1-31 Realized Avg. Repo</td><td>Jan14-31 Realized Avg. Repo</td><td>Investment Proceeds</td><td>Futures P&L</td><td>Net Proceeds</td></tr><tr><td>0.0375</td><td>0.0285</td><td>711.81</td><td>645.68</td><td>1,357.48</td></tr><tr><td>0.0525</td><td>0.0543</td><td>1,357.64</td><td>0.00</td><td>1,357.64</td></tr><tr><td>0.0775</td><td>0.0974</td><td>2,434.03</td><td>-1,076.13</td><td>1,357.90</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Table 12.4 shows that the January hedge performs as expected. The January SOFR futures price is at a rate of. $0.0525\%$ , which implies a rate of $0.0543\%$ over the last 18 days of the month. The money market fund can lock in the investment proceeds at this rate, that is,. $\$50$ million $\times0.0543\%$ $\times18/360$ , or about $\$1,358$ . At lower realized rates, investment proceeds. are lower, but futures gains compensate. At higher realized rates, investment proceeds are higher, but are given back through futures losses. Note that, as in the previous table, the hedge would work exactly for. $101/3$ contracts and a futures profit or loss of $\$412/3$ per basis point.  

The discussion of this January hedge reveals, more generally, that hedges. with one-month SOFR futures from any date within a month to the end of that month require no special handling. Hedge ratios are computed as if the entire month were being hedged, and, consequently, hedge ratios do not change over the course of the contract month. Applying this conclusion to the February part of the hedge, described earlier, the fund maintains its initial long of 9.33 contracts throughout the entire month of February, after which time those contracts expire.  

The remaining piece of the overall money market fund hedge is using the March contract to hedge repo rates from March 1 to 13, which rates determine the fund's investment proceeds from March 1 to the assumed horizon date of March 14. Proceeding in the same way as for January and February, the fund would hedge its $\$50$ million investment over 13 days with contracts that hedge $\$5$ million over 30 days by buying 10 times 13/30, or 4.33 March contracts. With the rate of the March contract at $0.185\%$ as of January 14, this approach would seemingly lock in a repo investment rate of $0.185\%$ . It is left to the reader to construct a table like Tables 12.3 and 12.4 to illustrate this point. The March hedge is actually more complicated than the January and February hedges, however, for two reasons. First, 4.33 contracts are appropriate from January 14 until before the setting of SOFR on March 1, but not for the rest of March. Consider, for example, the hedge on March 4, before the setting of SOFR on that day. There are 10 days left of exposure to the investment - March 4 to March 13, inclusive of both dates - and 28 days left of exposure to the contract - March 4 to March 31, inclusive of both dates. The hedge ratio, therefore, is given by,  

$$
\frac{\mathbb{S}50,000,000\times0.01\%\times\frac{10}{360}}{\mathbb{S}5,000,000\left(0.01\%\times\frac{28}{31}\right)}=10\times\frac{31}{28}\frac{10}{30}=3.69
$$  

In short, the appropriate number of contracts falls gradually over March from 4.33 before the setting of repo on March 1 to zero on March 14. More generally, the number of one-month SOFR contracts hedging exposure from the beginning of the month to sometime within the month declines over the course of the month.  

The second and more serious problem with the proposed March hedge. is its implicit assumption that repo rates in the first 13 days of March move in parallel with rates over the whole month. In fact, the Federal Reserve announces on March 16, 2022, whether it is or is not raising its short-term policy rates. The problem for the money market fund in the example, then, is the scenario in which the market raises its expectation for a policy rate increase on March 16. In that case, rate expectations for the second half of. March rise; the SOFR March contract rate rises and its price falls; the money. market fund loses money on its futures hedge; but, because repo rates do not rise before the policy change, in the first half of March, fund investment proceeds do not rise..  

In this particular example, there is a reasonable solution to the problem of the March hedge: hedge the exposure to repo interest rates from March 1 to March 13 with February SOFR contracts! The prior scheduled announcement of Federal Reserve policy rates is on January 26. Much of the fund's exposure to repo rates in the first part of March, therefore, is captured by February SOFR contracts, which incorporate expectations and realized policy decisions from the January meeting. Therefore, instead of purchasing 4.33 March contracts at the start of the hedge, on January 14, the fund can purchase an additional 4.33 February contracts. Of course, at the end of February, when the contracts expire, the fund is faced with another decision. It can essentially roll the hedge from February to March contracts, by purchasing 4.33 March contracts as the 4.33 February contracts expire. Or the fund might decide that the basis risk between changes in rates over the first part of March relative to changes in rates over the whole of March is large relative to the risk of repo rates moving much before the scheduled March policy meeting. In that case, the fund might choose not to hedge. In any case, the strategy of stacking the fund's March risk into February contracts is not a cure-all: some economic and financial surprises might affect repo rates in February, but not in the first part of March, while other surprises might affect repo rates in the first part of March, but not in February. All in all, however, the risk of rates changing over the policy meeting is likely the most important consideration, which argues for stacking into February contracts.  

TABLE 12.5Two Hedging Strategies for a $\$50$ Million Overnight Repo Investment with One-Month SOFR Futures Contracts, as of January 14, 2022.. There Is a Scheduled Federal Reserve Target Rate Policy Announcement on March 16, 2022.   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Ticker</td><td>ContractMonth</td><td>Month-by-Month NumberofContracts</td><td>Stacking Mar into Feb NumberofContracts</td></tr><tr><td>SERF2</td><td>Jan</td><td>10.33 =10×</td><td>10.33</td></tr><tr><td>SERG2</td><td>Feb</td><td>30 9.33 =10x 28 30</td><td>13.67</td></tr><tr><td>SERH2</td><td>Mar</td><td>4.33 = 10 x 13 30</td><td>0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>24.00</td><td>24.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

By way of summary, Table 12.5 describes the overall hedge strategies of the money market fund in this example. The. $\$50$ million amount being hedged and the number of days in each month, set against the $\$5$ million 30-day SOFR futures contract, give the number of contracts in the "Month-by-Month" strategy. Avoiding the basis risk of hedging the first part of March with all of March, and relying on the assumption that almost all repo rate variability arises from changes to policy target rates, the "Stacking Mar into Feb" strategy uses February contracts to hedge the risk from the first part of March..  

The notion of stacking contracts with risks from other periods allows the discussion to circle back to the question of dealing with a fractional number of contracts. Table 12.5 shows that the total number of contracts required in either hedge is 24. To avoid fractional contracts, then, while. keeping overall exposure correct, stack the fractional amounts from some. months into others. In the Month-by-Month strategy, for example, the fund might divide the total 24 contracts into 10 January contracts, 10 February contracts, and 4 March contracts. In the "Stacking Mar into Feb" strat-. egy, the fund might - to avoid too much idiosyncratic February risk - buy 11 January contracts and 13 February contracts. Any stacking strategy does expose the fund, however, to any idiosyncratic changes in rates that appear in one month, but not in another.  
