---
title: The Phases of the Classic Deflationary Debt Cycle
cssclasses: academia
tags:
  - bubble_formation
  - cash_flow_problem
  - debt_cycle
  - deflationary_debt_cycle
  - goldilocks_period
  - solvency_problem
aliases:
  - Deflationary Cycle
  - Phases of Debt Cycle
key_concepts:
  - Accounting/regulatory rules
  - Borrower capacity
  - Bubble asset returns
  - Debt growth vs income
  - Fiscal/monetary policy
  - Solvency vs cash flow
---

# The Phases of the Classic Deflationary Debt Cycle

### 1\) The Early Part of the Cycle

In the early part of the cycle,  debt is not growing faster than incomes,  even though debt growth is strong. That is because debt growth is being used to finance activities that produce fast income growth. For instance,  borrowed money may go toward expanding a business and making it more productive,  supporting growth in revenues. Debt burdens are low and balance sheets are healthy,  so there is plenty of room for the private sector,  government,  and banks to lever up. Debt growth,  economic growth,  and inflation are neither too hot nor too cold. This is what is called the “Goldilocks” period.

### 2\) The Bubble

In the first stage of the bubble,  debts rise faster than incomes,  and they produce accelerating strong asset returns and growth. This process is generally self-reinforcing because rising incomes,  net-worths,  and asset values raise borrowers’ capacities to borrow. This happens because lenders determine how much they can lend on the basis of the borrowers’ 1\) projected income/cash flows to service the debt,  2\) net worth/collateral \(which rises as asset prices rise\),  and 3\) their own capacities to lend. All of these rise together. Though this set of conditions is not sustainable because the debt growth rates are increasing faster than the incomes that will be required to service them,  borrowers feel rich,  so they spend more than they earn and buy assets at high prices with leverage. Here’s one example of how that happens: Suppose you earn $50,  000 a year and have a net worth of $50,  000. You have the capacity to borrow $10,  000 per year,   so you could spend $60,  000 per year for a number of years,  even though you only earn $50,  000. For an economy as a whole,  increased borrowing and spending can lead to higher incomes,  and rising stock valuations and other asset values,  giving people more collateral to borrow against. People then borrow more and more,  but as long as the borrowing drives growth,  it is affordable.

In this up-wave part of the long-term debt cycle,  promises to deliver money \(i.e.,  debt burdens\) rise relative to both the supply of money in the overall economy and the amount of money and credit debtors have coming in \(via incomes,  borrowing,  and sales of assets\). This up-wave typically goes on for decades,  with variations primarily due to central banks’ periodic tightenings and easings of credit. These are short-term debt cycles,  and a bunch of them generally add up to a long-term debt cycle.

A key reason the long-term debt cycle can be sustained for so long is that central banks progressively lower interest rates,  which raises asset prices and,  in turn,  people’s wealth,  because of the present value effect that lowering interest rates has on asset prices. This keeps debt service burdens from rising,  and it lowers the monthly payment cost of items bought on credit. But this can’t go on forever. Eventually the debt service payments become equal to or larger than the amount debtors can borrow,  and the debts \(i.e.,  the promises to deliver money\) become too large in relation to the amount of money in existence there is to give. When promises to deliver money \(i.e.,  debt\) can’t rise any more relative to the money and credit coming in,  the process works in reverse and deleveraging begins. Since borrowing is simply a way of pulling spending forward,  the person spending $60,  000 per year and earning $50,  000 per year has to cut his spending to $40,  000 for as many years as he spent $60,  000,  all else being equal.

Though a bit of an oversimplification,  this is the essential dynamic that drives the inflating and deflating of a bubble.

#### The Start of a Bubble: The Bull Market

Bubbles usually start as over-extrapolations of justified bull markets. The bull markets are initially justified because lower interest rates make investment assets,  such as stocks and real estate,  more attractive so they go up,  and economic conditions improve,  which leads to economic growth and corporate profits,  improved balance sheets,  and the ability to take on more debt—all of which make the companies worth more.

As assets go up in value,  net worths and spending/income levels rise. Investors,  business people,  financial intermediaries,  and policy makers increase their confidence in ongoing prosperity,  which supports the leveraging-up process. The boom also encourages new buyers who don’t want to miss out on the action to enter the market,  fueling the emergence of a bubble. Quite often,  uneconomic lending and the bubble occur because of implicit or explicit government guarantees that encourage lending institutions to lend recklessly.

As new speculators and lenders enter the market and confidence increases,  credit standards fall. Banks lever up and new types of lending institutions that are largely unregulated develop \(these nonbank lending institutions are referred to collectively as a “shadow banking” system\). These shadow banking institutions are typically less under the blanket of government protections. At these times,  new types of lending vehicles are frequently invented and a lot of financial engineering takes place.

The lenders and the speculators make a lot of fast,  easy money,  which reinforces the bubble by increasing the speculators’ equity,  giving them the collateral they need to secure new loans. At the time,  most people don’t think that is a problem; to the contrary,  they think that what is happening is a reflection and confirmation of the boom. This phase of the cycle typically feeds on itself. Taking stocks as an example,  rising stock prices lead to more spending and investment,  which raises earnings,  which raises stock prices,  which lowers credit spreads and encourages increased lending \(based on the increased value of collateral and higher earnings\),  which affects spending and investment rates,  *etc.* During such times,  most people think the assets are a fabulous treasure to own—and consider anyone who doesn’t own them to be missing out. As a result of this dynamic,  all sorts of entities build up long positions. Large asset-liability mismatches increase in the forms of a\) borrowing short-term to lend long-term,  b\) taking on liquid liabilities to invest in illiquid assets,  and c\) investing in riskier debt or other risky assets with money borrowed from others,  and/or d\) borrowing in one currency and lending in another,  all to pick up a perceived spread. All the while,  debts rise fast and debt service costs rise even faster. The charts below paint the picture.

In markets,  when there’s a consensus,  it gets priced in. This consensus is also typically believed to be a good rough picture of what’s to come,  even though history has shown that the future is likely to turn out differently than expected. In other words,  humans by nature \(like most species\) tend to move in crowds and weigh recent experience more heavily than is appropriate. In these ways,  and because the consensus view is reflected in the price,  extrapolation tends to occur.

At such times,  increases in debt-to-income ratios are very rapid. The above chart shows the archetypal path of debt as a percent of GDP for the deflationary deleveragings we averaged. The typical bubble sees leveraging up at an average rate of 20 to 25 percent of GDP over three years or so. The blue line depicts the arc of the long-term debt cycle in the form of the total debt of the economy divided by the total income of the economy as it passes through its various phases; the red line charts the total amount of debt service payments relative to the total amount of income.

Bubbles are most likely to occur at the tops in the business cycle,  balance of payments cycle,  and/or long-term debt cycle. As a bubble nears its top,  the economy is most vulnerable,  but people are feeling the wealthiest and the most bullish. In the cases we studied,  total debt-to-income levels averaged around 300 percent of GDP. To convey a few rough average numbers,  below we show some key indications of what the archetypal bubble looks like:

#### The Role of Monetary Policy

In many cases,  **[[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] helps inflate the bubble rather than constrain it**. This is especially true when inflation and growth are both good and investment returns are great. Such periods are typically interpreted to be a productivity boom that reinforces investor optimism as they leverage up to buy investment assets. In such cases,  central banks,  focusing on inflation and growth,  are often reluctant to adequately tighten money. This is what happened in Japan in the late 1980s,  and in much of the world in the late 1920s and mid-2000s.

This is one of the biggest problems with most central bank policies—i.e.,  because central bankers target either inflation or inflation and growth and don’t target the management of bubbles,  the debt growth that they enable can go to finance the creation of bubbles if inflation and real growth don’t appear to be too strong. In my opinion it’s very important for central banks to target debt growth with an eye toward keeping it at a sustainable level—i.e.,  at a level where the growth in income is likely to be large enough to service the debts regardless of what credit is used to buy. Central bankers sometimes say that it is too hard to spot bubbles and that it’s not their role to assess and control them—that it is their job to control inflation and growth But what they control is money and credit,  and when that money and credit goes into debts that can’t be paid back,  that has huge implications for growth and inflation down the road. The greatest depressions occur when bubbles burst,  and if the central banks that are producing the debts that are inflating them won’t control them,  then who will? The economic pain of allowing a large bubble to inflate and then burst is so high that it is imprudent for policy makers to ignore them,  and I hope their perspective will change.

While central banks typically do tighten money somewhat and short rates rise on average when inflation and growth start to get too hot,  typical monetary policies are not adequate to manage bubbles,  because bubbles are occurring in some parts of the economy and not others. Thinking about the whole economy,  central banks typically fall behind the curve during such periods,  and borrowers are not yet especially squeezed by higher debt-service costs. Quite often at this stage,  their interest payments are increasingly being covered by borrowing more rather than by income growth—a clear sign that the trend is unsustainable.

All this reverses when the bubble pops and the same linkages that inflated the bubble make the downturn self-reinforcing. Falling asset prices decrease both the equity and collateral values of leveraged speculators,  which causes lenders to pull back. This forces speculators to sell,  driving down prices even more. Also,  lenders and investors “run” \(i.e.,  withdraw their money\) from risky financial intermediaries and risky investments,  causing them to have liquidity problems. Typically,  the affected market or markets are big enough and leveraged enough that the losses on the accumulated debt are systemically threatening,  which is to say that they threaten to topple the entire economy.

#### Spotting Bubbles

While the particulars may differ across cases \(e.g.,  the size of the bubble; whether it’s in stocks,  housing,  or some other asset5; how exactly the bubble pops; and so on\),  the many cases of bubbles are much more similar than they are different,  and each is a result of logical cause-and-effect relationships that can be studied and understood. If one holds a strong mental map of how bubbles form,  it becomes much easier to identify them.

To identify a big debt crisis before it occurs,  I look at all the big markets and see which,  if any,  are in bubbles. Then I look at what’s connected to them that would be affected when they pop. While I won’t go into exactly how it works here,  the most defining characteristics of bubbles that can be measured are:

1. 1\) Prices are high relative to traditional measures
1. 2\) Prices are discounting future rapid price appreciation from these high levels
1. 3\) There is broad bullish sentiment
1. 4\) Purchases are being financed by high leverage
1. 5\) Buyers have made exceptionally extended forward purchases \(e.g.,  built inventory,  contracted for supplies,  etc.\) to speculate or to protect themselves against future price gains
1. 6\) New buyers \(i.e.,  those who weren’t previously in the market\) have entered the market
1. 7\) Stimulative [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] threatens to inflate the bubble even more \(and tight policy to cause its popping\)
At this point I want to emphasize that it is a mistake to think that any one metric can serve as an indicator of an impending debt crisis. The ratio of debt to income for the economy as a whole,  or even debt service payments to income for the economy as a whole,  which is better,  are useful but ultimately inadequate measures. To anticipate a debt crisis well,  one has to look at the specific debt-service abilities of the individual entities,  which are lost in these averages. More specifically,  a high level of debt or debt service to income is less problematic if the average is well distributed across the economy than if it is concentrated—especially if it is concentrated in key entities.

### 3\) The Top

When prices have been driven by a lot of leveraged buying and the market gets fully long,  leveraged,  and overpriced,  it becomes ripe for a reversal. This reflects a general principle: When things are so good that they can’t get better—yet everyone believes that they will get better—tops of markets are being made.

While tops are triggered by different events,  most often they occur when the central bank starts to tighten and interest rates rise. In some cases the tightening is brought about by the bubble itself,  because growth and inflation are rising while capacity constraints are beginning to pinch. In other cases,  the tightening is externally driven. For example,  for a country that has become reliant on borrowing from external creditors,  the pulling back of lending due to exogenous causes will lead to liquidity tightening. A tightening of [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] in the currency in which debts are denominated can be enough to cause foreign capital to pull back. This can happen for reasons unrelated to conditions in the domestic economy \(e.g.,  [[Week 3 Cyclical Industries (and Advanced Forecasting)|cyclical]] conditions in a reserve currency country leads to a tightening in liquidity in that currency,  or a financial crisis results in a pullback of capital,  etc.\). Also,  a rise in the currency the debt is in relative to the currency incomes are in can cause an especially severe squeeze. Sometimes unanticipated shortfalls in cash flows due to any number of reasons can trigger the debt crises.

Whatever the cause of the debt-service squeeze,  it hurts asset prices \(e.g.,  stock prices\),  which has a negative “wealth effect”6 as lenders begin to worry that they might not be able to get their cash back from those they lent it to. Borrowers are squeezed as an increasing share of their new borrowing goes to pay debt service and/or isn’t rolled over and their spending slows down. This is classically the result of people buying investment assets at high prices with leverage,  based on overly optimistic assumptions about future cash flow. Typically,  these types of credit/debt problems start to emerge about half a year ahead of the peak in the economy,  at first in its most vulnerable and frothy pockets. The riskiest debtors start to miss payments,  lenders begin to worry,  credit spreads start to tick up,  and risky lending slows. Runs from risky assets to less risky assets pick up,  contributing to a broadening of the contraction.

Typically,  in the early stages of the top,  the rise in short rates narrows or eliminates the spread with long rates \(i.e.,  the extra interest rate earned for lending long term rather than short term\),  lessening the incentive to lend relative to the incentive to hold cash. As a result of the yield curve being flat or inverted \(i.e.,  long-term interest rates are at their lowest relative to short-term interest rates\),  people are incentivized to move to cash just before the bubble pops,  slowing credit growth and causing the previously described dynamic.

Early on in the top,  some parts of the credit system suffer,  but others remain robust,  so it isn’t clear that the economy is weakening. So while the central bank is still raising interest rates and tightening credit,  the seeds of the recession are being sown. The fastest rate of tightening typically comes about five months prior to the top of the stock market. The economy is then operating at a high rate,  with demand pressing up against the capacity to produce. Unemployment is normally at [[Week 3 Cyclical Industries (and Advanced Forecasting)|cyclical]] lows and inflation rates are rising. The increase in short-term interest rates makes holding cash more attractive,  and it raises the interest rate used to discount the future cash flows of assets,  weakening riskier asset prices and slowing lending. It also makes items bought on credit de facto more expensive,  slowing demand. Short rates typically peak just a few months before the top in the stock market.

The more leverage that exists and the higher the prices,  the less tightening it takes to prick the bubble and the bigger the bust that follows. To understand the magnitude of the downturn that is likely to occur,  it is less important to understand the magnitude of the tightening than it is to understand each particular sector’s sensitivity to tightening and how losses will cascade. These pictures are best seen by looking at each of the important sectors of the economy and each of the big players in these sectors rather than at economy-wide averages.

In the immediate postbubble period,  the wealth effect of asset price movements has a bigger impact on economic growth rates than [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] does. People tend to underestimate the size of this effect. In the early stages of a bubble bursting,  when stock prices fall and earnings have not yet declined,  people mistakenly judge the decline to be a buying opportunity and find stocks cheap in relation to both past earnings and expected earnings,  failing to account for the amount of decline in earnings that is likely to result from what’s to come. But the reversal is self-reinforcing. As wealth falls first and incomes fall later,  creditworthiness worsens,  which constricts lending activity,  which hurts spending and lowers investment rates while also making it less appealing to borrow to buy financial assets. This in turn worsens the fundamentals of the asset \(e.g.,  the weaker economic activity leads corporate earnings to chronically disappoint\),  leading people to sell and driving down prices further. This has an accelerating downward impact on asset prices,  income,  and wealth.

### 4\) The “Depression”

In normal recessions \(when [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] is still effective\),  the imbalance between the amount of money and the need for it to service debt can be rectified by cutting interest rates enough to 1\) produce a positive wealth effect,  2\) stimulate economic activity,  and 3\) ease debt-service burdens. This can’t happen in depressions,  because risk-free interest rates can’t be cut materially because they have either already reached close to 0 percent or,  in cases where currency outflows and currency weaknesses are great,  the floor on interest rates is higher because of credit or currency risk considerations. At the same time,  credit spreadsI are wide.

This is precisely the formula for a depression. As shown,  this happened in the early stage of both the 1930–32 depression and the 2008–09 depression. In well managed cases,  like the US in 2007–08,  the Fed lowered rates very quickly and then,  when that didn’t work,  moved on to alternative means of stimulating,  having learned from its mistakes in the 1930s when the Fed was slower to ease and even tightened at times to defend the dollar’s peg to gold.

As the depression begins,  debt defaults and restructurings hit the various players,  especially leveraged lenders \(e.g.,  banks\),  like an avalanche. Both lenders’ and depositors’ justified fears feed on themselves,  leading to runs on financial institutions that typically don’t have the cash to meet them unless they are under the umbrella of government protections. Cutting interest rates doesn’t work adequately because the floors on risk-free rates have already been hit and because as credit spreads rise,  the interest rates on risky loans go up,  making it difficult for those debts to be serviced. When one owes money or needs to borrow money and the interest rate rises on the debt,  naturally one’s financial condition worsens. And when one’s financial condition worsens,  naturally lenders are more reluctant to lend,  which leads interest rates to rise even more. So,  as you can see,  a self-reinforcing spiral of these developments can happen,  squeezing the debtor,  which leads to a deadly result once the interest rate raises to a level that is intolerable.

I call this self-reinforcing process a “debt death spiral.” No one who needs to borrow money is immune from it because there is always an interest rate high enough to ruin them. As you can imagine,  when debtors and creditors are both being squeezed from all directions,  such debt death spirals reinforce the debt crises. Interest rate cuts also don’t do much to help lending institutions that have liquidity problems and are suffering from runs. At this phase of the cycle,  debt defaults and austerity \(i.e.,  the forces of deflation\) dominate,  and are not sufficiently balanced with the stimulative and inflationary forces of printing money to cover debts \(i.e.,  debt monetization\).

With investors unwilling to continue lending and borrowers scrambling to find cash to cover their debt payments,  liquidity—i.e.,  the ability to sell investments for money—becomes a major concern. As an illustration,  when you own a $100,  000 debt instrument,   you presume that you will be able to exchange it for $100,  000 in cash and,  in turn,  exchange the cash for $100,  000 worth of goods and services. However since the ratio of financial assets to money is high,  when a large number of people rush to convert their financial assets into money and buy goods and services in bad times,  the central bank either has to provide the liquidity that’s needed by printing more money or allow a lot of defaults.

The depression can come from,  or cause,  either solvency problems or cash-flow problems. Usually a lot of both types of problems exist during this phase. A solvency problem means that,  according to accounting and regulatory rules,  the entity does not have enough equity capital to operate—i.e.,  it is “broke” and must be shut down. So,  the accounting laws have a big impact on the severity of the debt problem at this moment. A cash-flow problem means that an entity doesn’t have enough cash to meet its needs,  typically because its own lenders are taking money away from it—i.e.,  there is a “run.” A cash-flow problem can occur even when the entity has adequate capital because the equity is in illiquid assets. Lack of cash flow is an immediate and severe problem—and as a result,  the trigger and main issue of most debt crises.

Each kind of problem requires a different approach. If a solvency problem exists \(i.e.,  the debtor doesn’t have enough equity capital\),  it has an accounting/regulatory problem that can be dealt with by either a\) providing enough equity capital or b\) changing the accounting/regulatory rules,  which hides the problem. Governments can do this directly through fiscal policy or indirectly through clever monetary policies if the debt is in their own currency. Similarly,  if a cash-flow problem exists,  fiscal and/or [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] can provide either cash or guarantees that resolve it.

A good example of how these forces are relevant is highlighted by the differences between the debt/banking crises of the 1980s and 2008. In the 1980s,  there was not as much mark-to-market accounting \(because the crisis involved loans that weren’t traded every day in public markets\),  so the banks were not as “insolvent” as they were in 2008. With more mark-to-market accounting in 2008,  the banks required capital injections and/or guarantees to improve their balance sheets. Both crises were successfully managed,  though the ways they were managed had to be different.

Going into the “depression” phase of the cycle \(by which I mean the severe contraction phase\) some protections learned from past depressions \(e.g.,  bank-deposit insurance,  the ability to provide lender-of-last-resort financial supports and guarantees and to inject capital into systemically important institutions or nationalize them\) are typically in place and are helpful,  but they are rarely adequate,  because the exact nature of the debt crisis hasn’t been well thought through. Typically,  quite a lot of lending has taken place in the relatively unregulated “shadow banking system,  ” or in new instruments that have unanticipated risks and inadequate regulations. What happens in response to these new realities depends on the capabilities of the policy makers in the decision roles and the freedom of the system to allow them to do what is best.

Some people mistakenly think that depressions are psychological: that investors move their money from riskier investments to safer ones \(e.g.,  from stocks and high-yield lending to government bonds and cash\) because they’re scared,  and that the economy will be restored if they can only be coaxed into moving their money back into riskier investments. This is wrong for two reasons: First,  contrary to popular belief,  the deleveraging dynamic is not primarily psychological. It is mostly driven by the supply and demand of,  and the relationships between,  credit,  money,  and goods and services—though psychology of course also does have an effect,  especially in regard to the various players’ liquidity positions. Still,  if everyone went to sleep and woke up with no memory of what had happened,  we would be in the same position,  because debtors’ obligations to deliver money would be too large relative to the money they are taking in. The government would still be faced with the same choices that would have the same consequences,  and so on.

Related to this,  if the central bank produces more money to alleviate the shortage,  it will cheapen the value of money,  making a reality of creditors’ worries about being paid back an amount of money that is worth less than what they loaned. While some people think that the amount of money in existence remains the same and simply moves from riskier assets to less risky ones,  that’s not true. Most of what people think is money is really credit,  and credit does appear out of thin air during good times and then disappear at bad times. For example,  when you buy something in a store on a credit card,  you essentially do so by saying,  “I promise to pay.” Together you and the store owner create a credit asset and a credit liability. So where do you take the money from? Nowhere. You created credit. It goes away in the same way. Suppose the store owner rightly believes that you and others won’t pay the credit card company and that the credit card company won’t pay him. Then he correctly believes that the credit “asset” he has isn’t really there. It didn’t go somewhere else; it’s simply gone.

As this implies,  a big part of the deleveraging process is people discovering that much of what they thought of as their wealth was merely people’s promises to give them money. Now that those promises aren’t being kept,  that wealth no longer exists. When investors try to convert their investments into money in order to raise cash,  they test their ability to get paid,  and in cases where it fails,  panic-induced “runs” and sell-offs of securities occur. Naturally those who experience runs,  especially banks \(though this is true of most entities that rely on short-term funding\),  have problems raising money and credit to meet their needs,  so debt defaults cascade.

Debt defaults and restructurings hit people,  especially leveraged lenders \(e.g.,  banks\),  and fear cascades through the system. These fears feed on themselves and lead to a scramble for cash that results in a shortage \(i.e.,  a liquidity crisis\). The dynamic works like this: Initially,  the money coming in to debtors via incomes and borrowing is not enough to meet the debtors’ obligations; assets need to be sold and spending needs to be cut in order to raise cash. This leads asset values to fall,  which reduces the value of collateral,  and in turn reduces incomes. Since borrowers’ creditworthiness is judged by both a\) the values of their assets/collaterals in relation to their debts \(i.e.,  their net worth\) and b\) the sizes of their incomes relative to the sizes of their debt-service payments,  and since both their net worth and their income fall faster than their debts,  borrowers become less creditworthy and lenders more reluctant to lend. This goes on in a self-reinforcing manner.

The depression phase is dominated by the deflationary forces of debt reduction \(i.e.,  defaults and restructurings\) and austerity occurring without material efforts to reduce debt burdens by printing money. Because one person’s debts are another’s assets,  the effect of aggressively cutting the value of those assets can be to greatly reduce the demand for goods,  services,  and investment assets. For a write-down to be effective,  it must be large enough to allow the debtor to service the restructured loan. If the write-down is 30 percent,  then the creditor’s assets are reduced by that much. If that sounds like a lot,  it’s actually much more. Since most lenders are leveraged \(e.g.,  they borrow to buy assets\),  the impact of a 30 percent write-down on their net worth can be much greater. For example,  the creditor who is leveraged 2:1 would experience a 60 percent decline in his net worth \(i.e.,  their assets are twice their net worth,  so the decline in asset value has twice the impact\) Since banks are typically leveraged about 12:1 or 15:1,  that picture is obviously devastating for them and for the economy as a whole.

Even as debts are written down,  debt burdens rise as spending and incomes fall. Debt levels also rise relative to net worth,  as shown in the chart below. As debt-to-income and debt-to-net-worth ratios go up and the availability of credit goes down,  naturally the credit contraction becomes self-reinforcing on the downside.

The capitalists/investors class experiences a tremendous loss of “real” wealth during depressions because the value of their investment portfolios collapses \(declines in equity prices are typically around 50 percent\),  their earned incomes fall,  and they typically face higher tax rates. As a result,  they become extremely defensive. Quite often,  they are motivated to move their money out of the country \(which contributes to currency weakness\),  dodge taxes,  and seek safety in liquid,  noncredit-dependent investments \(e.g.,  low-risk government bonds,  gold,  or cash\).

Of course,  the real economy as well as the financial economy suffers. With [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] constrained,  the uncontrolled credit contraction produces an economic and social catastrophe. Workers suffer as incomes collapse and job losses are severe. Hard-working people who once were able to provide for their families lose the opportunity to have meaningful work and suddenly become either destitute or dependent. Homes are lost because owners can no longer afford to pay their mortgages,  retirement accounts are wiped out,  and savings for college are lost. These conditions can persist for many years if policy makers don’t offset the depression’s deflationary forces with sufficient monetary stimulation of a new form.

#### ****Managing Depressions

As mentioned earlier,  the policies that reduce debt burdens fall under four broad categories: 1\) austerity,  2\) debt defaults/restructurings,  3\) debt monetization/money printing,  and 4\) wealth transfers \(i.e.,  from the haves to the have-nots\). By using these kinds of levers well,  policy makers can mitigate the worst effects of a depression and manage both the failed lenders and borrowers and the economic conditions. But it’s important to recognize that each of these levers has different impacts on the economy and creditworthiness. The key is to get the mix right,  so that deflationary and depressive forces are balanced with inflationary and stimulative ones.

Policy makers typically get the mix between austerity,  money printing,  and redistribution wrong initially. Taxpayers are understandably angry at the debtors and at the financial institutions whose excesses caused the debt crisis,  and don’t want the government \(i.e.,  their taxes\) to bail them out. And policy makers justifiably believe that debt excesses will happen again if lenders and borrowers don’t suffer the downsides of their actions \(which is called the “moral hazard” problem\). For all these reasons,  policy makers are usually reluctant and slow to provide government supports,  and the debt contraction and the agony it produces increase quickly. But the longer they wait to apply stimulative remedies to the mix,  the uglier the deleveraging becomes Eventually they choose to provide a lot of guarantees,  print a lot of money,  and monetize a lot of debt,  which lifts the economy into a reflationary deleveraging. If they do these things and get the mix right quickly,  the depression is much more likely to be relatively short-lived \(like the short period of “depression” following the US crisis in 2008\). If they don’t,  the depression is usually prolonged \(like the Great Depression in the 1930s,  or Japan’s “lost decade” following its bubble in the late 1980s\).

**To reiterate,  the two biggest impediments to managing a debt crisis are: a\) the failure to know how to handle it well and b\) politics or statutory limitations on the powers of policy makers to take the necessary actions.** In other words,  *ignorance and a lack of authority are bigger problems than debts themselves*. While being a successful investment manager is hard,  it’s not nearly as hard as being a successful economic policy maker. We investors only have to understand how the economic machine works and anticipate what will happen next. Policy makers have to do that,  plus make everything turn out well—i.e.,  they have to know what should be done while navigating through all the political impediments that make it so hard to get it done. To do that requires a lot of smarts,  a willingness to fight,  and political savvy—i.e.,  skills and heroism—and sometimes even with all those things,  the constraints under which they work still prevent them from being successful.

Below I’ll walk through each of the four levers and how they are typically used in the depression phase.

#### Austerity

In the depression phase,  policy makers typically try austerity because that’s the obvious thing to do. It’s natural to want to let those who got themselves and others in trouble to bear the costs. The problem is that even deep austerity doesn’t bring debt and income back into balance. When spending is cut,  incomes are also cut,  so it takes an awful lot of painful spending cuts to make significant reductions in the debt/income ratios.

As the economy contracts,  government revenues typically fall. At the same time,  demands on the government increase. As a result,  deficits typically increase. Seeking to be fiscally responsible,  at this point governments tend to raise taxes.

Both moves are big mistakes.

#### “Printing Money” to Stop the Bleeding and Stimulate the Economy

Quite often “runs” on lending institutions occur,  especially those that aren’t protected by government guarantees. That puts the central bank and the central government in the position of having to decide which depositors/lenders should be protected from losses and which should be allowed to sustain them,  and which institutions are systemically important and should be saved—and how to do these things in a way that maximizes the safety of the financial/economic system while minimizing costs to the government/taxpayers. At such times all sorts of guarantees are offered to systemically critical financial institutions—and quite often some of these institutions are nationalized. Typically there are a lot of laws and politics that affect how quickly and how well this is done. Some of the money that is needed comes from the government \(i.e.,  it is appropriated through the budget process\) and some from the central banks \(by “printing”\). Governments inevitably do both,  though in varying degrees. In addition to providing money to some essential banks,  governments also typically provide money to some nonbank entities they consider essential.

Next,  they must ease the credit crunch and stimulate the overall economy. Since the government is likely having trouble raising funds through taxation and borrowing,  central banks are forced to choose between “printing” still more money to buy their governments’ debts or allowing their governments and their private sector to compete for the limited supply of money,  which will only tighten money further. Inevitably,  they choose to print.

Typically,  though not necessarily,  these moves come in progressively larger doses as more modest initial attempts fail to rectify the imbalance and reverse the deleveraging process. However,  those early efforts do typically cause temporary periods of relief that are manifest in bear-market rallies in financial assets and increased economic activity. During the Great Depression there were six big rallies in the stock market \(of between 16 percent and 48 percent\) in a bear market that declined a total of 89 percent. All of those rallies were triggered by government actions that were intended to reduce the fundamental imbalance. When they are managed well,  those shifts in policies to “print money,  ” buy assets,  and provide guarantees are what moves the debt cycle from its depression/“ugly deleveraging” phase to its expansion/“beautiful deleveraging” phase. The chart below shows how this “money printing” happened in the US in the 1930s and again after 2008.

While highly stimulative [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] is a critical part of a deleveraging,  it is typically not sufficient. When risks emerge that systemically important institutions will fail,  policy makers must take steps to keep these entities running. They must act immediately to:

- **Curtail panic and guarantee liabilities.** Governments can increase guarantees on deposits and debt issuance. Central banks can provide systemically important institutions \(i.e.,  institutions whose failures would threaten the ongoing operating of the financial system and/or that of the economy\) with injections of money. Occasionally,  governments can force liquidity to remain in the banking system by imposing deposit freezes,  which is generally undesirable because it intensifies the panic,  but is sometimes necessary because there is no other way of providing that money/liquidity. Policy makers providing guarantees in order to provide support is often easier and preferable to providing cash. Because coming up with guarantees doesn’t require coming up with actual money and all that’s required to do that \(e.g.,  obtaining approvals,  doing transactions,  changing income statements and balance sheets\) it’s typically easier and quicker. Guarantees also have the nice aspect of only kicking in when the worst case scenario happens. They are so powerful that they work even when just implied by governments that have controls of their own printing presses. That can lead to bad lending because lenders get too reliant on the guarantor and no longer care about the creditworthiness of the borrower. For that reason,  governments need to be careful to use guarantees sparingly.
- **Provide liquidity.** When private credit is contracting and liquidity is tight,  the central bank can ensure that sufficient liquidity is provided to the financial system by lending against a widening range of collateral or to an increasingly wide range of financial institutions that are not normally considered part of their lending practices.
- **Support the solvency of systemically important institutions.** The first step is usually to incentivize the private sector to address the problem,  often by supporting mergers between failed banks and healthy banks and by regulatory pushes to issue more capital to the private sector. In addition,  accounting adjustments can be made to reduce the immediate need for capital to maintain solvency,  buying more time for the institutions to earn their way out of their problems.
- **Recapitalize/nationalize/cover losses of systemically important financial institutions.** When the above approaches are insufficient to deal with the solvency problems of systemically important financial institutions,  governments must step in to recapitalize failed banks. Moving to stabilize lenders and maintain the credit supply is critical to preventing a crisis from getting worse. Certain institutions are part of the plumbing of the system; one would hate to lose them even if they’re not making money at the moment. It would be like losing a shipping port in a depression because the port goes broke. You want the port to continue to operate and ships to come in,  so you have to protect it one way or another—whether through a nationalization,  loans,  or capital injections.

#### Debt Defaults/Restructurings

Ultimately,  the process of cleansing existing bad debts is critical for the future flow of money and credit and for a return to prosperity. The challenge for policy makers is to allow that process to work itself out in an orderly way that ensures economic and social stability. The best-managed cases are those in which policy makers a\) swiftly recognize the magnitude of the credit problems; b\) don’t save every institution that is expendable,  balancing the benefits of allowing broke institutions to fail and be restructured with the risks that such failures can have detrimental effects on other creditworthy lenders and borrowers; c\) create or restore robust credit pipes that allow for future borrowing by creditworthy borrowers; and d\) ensure acceptable growth and inflation conditions while the bad debts are being worked out. Longer term,  the most important decision that policy makers have to make is whether they will change the system to fix the root causes of the debt problems or simply restructure the debts so that the pain is distributed over the population and over time so that the debt does not impose an intolerable burden.

These things rarely happen right away. Policy makers typically fail to recognize the magnitude of the problem initially,  instead enacting a number of one-off policies that are insufficient to move the needle. It is only after what is usually a couple of years and a lot of unnecessary economic pain that they finally act decisively. How quickly and aggressively policy makers respond is among the most important factors in determining the severity and length of the depression. And the question of exactly how these costs are divided between the government \(which means the society as a whole\) and the bond holders \(of varying seniorities\),  equity holders,  depositors,  etc.,  is an important one.

Typically,  nonsystemically important institutions are forced to absorb their losses,  and if they fail,  are allowed to go bankrupt. The resolution of these institutions can take several different forms. In many cases \(about 80 percent of the cases we studied\),  they are merged with healthy institutions. In some other cases,  the assets are liquidated or transferred to an “asset-management company” \(AMC\) set up by the government to be sold piecemeal.

In some cases,  policy makers recognize that ensuring the viability of the whole banking system is critical and liquidity and solvency measures are taken at the banking system level. In recent years it has become common for guarantees of bank liabilities to be issued in countries in the developed world. In rare cases,  government-financed bank recapitalization is done across all banks,  rather than focused solely on systemically important institutions.

There are relatively clear lines for which creditors receive protections:

- **Small depositors are given preference and experience minimal or no losses \(in nearly every case\).** Often this is explicitly defined as part of a deposit insurance scheme. Coverage is usually expanded during the crisis period in order to ensure liquidity for the banks. Even in cases where there isn’t an explicit deposit insurance scheme,  depositors are often prioritized. In around 30 percent of cases studied,  depositors did take losses,  though they were often on foreign-exchange deposits through conversion at below-market exchange rates.
- **In most cases when institutions fail,  equity,  subordinated debt,  and large depositors absorb losses regardless of whether the institution was systemically important or not.** Protection of senior and subordinated debt holders,  and equity recapitalizations that are simply dilutive to existing equity holders,  are seen mostly in the developed world.
- **Sometimes policy makers prioritize domestic creditors over foreign creditors,  especially when their loans are to private-sector players and are lower down in the capital structure.** This is especially true as deposit insurance programs run low on funds. But at the same time governments often end up prioritizing the payment of loans from multinational institutions like the IMF and BIS,  as it’s important to maintain availability of support from these public entities,  who effectively act as lenders of last resort to countries under stress.

Typically,  the process of dealing with the failed lenders is accompanied by a spate of regulatory reforms. Sometimes these changes are modest and sometimes they are very large; sometimes they are for the better and sometimes they are for the worse. They range from changes in how banks operate \(e.g.,  putting in deposit guarantees in the 1930s or [[Note on The Dodd-Frank Act and Its Impact|Dodd-Frank]] and the Volcker rule in 2010 in the US\) to labor market reforms,  from requiring banks to improve credit standards to opening the banking system to competition \(including foreign entrants\) to raising capital requirements and removing protections to lenders.

Politics plays a big role in determining what reforms are made. In some cases,  such reforms end up distorting private-sector market-based incentives on the flow of lending,  which can limit the flow of credit to creditworthy borrowers and/or increase the risks of future credit problems emerging. In other cases,  they improve the flow of credit,  protect households,  and reduce the risk of debt problems in the future.

There are two main ways in which failed lenders’ assets or existing lenders’ bad assets are managed: They are either a\) transferred to a separate entity \(an AMC\) to manage the restructuring and asset disposal \(about 40 percent of the cases studied\) or b\) they remain on the balance sheet of the original lending institution to manage \(about 60 percent of cases\). And there are several main levers for disposing of the nonperforming loans: a\) restructuring \(e.g.,  working out the loans through extended terms\),  b\) debt-for-equity swaps and asset seizures,  c\) direct sales of the loans or assets to third parties,  and d\) securitizations.

The use of an AMC generally accelerates the management of the debt problem because it frees up existing banks to return to lending and helps consolidate the bad debts to a centralized entity that can manage sales and restructurings. Selling assets to AMCs also often serves as a mechanism to engage in transfers to banks by pricing them at above market prices. AMCs are typically publicly owned entities that are mandated to sell the assets within some targeted time frame \(e.g.,  10 years\) while minimizing costs to the taxpayer and disruptions of asset markets. They do this by seeking to quickly sell off the performing assets of failed institutions and working over time to manage and sell off nonperforming assets. In some cases AMCs have explicit goals to restructure the nonperforming debts to reduce debt burdens. They are generally financed by some form of direct or pseudo-government debt issuance,  and they cannot work well when legal,  political,  or funding constraints limit their ability to recognize bad debts and restructure them.

Allowing the original lender to manage its bad debts often occurs when the original lender is state-sponsored,  which makes it closer to a public AMC. In other cases losses may be allowed to sit on the lender’s balance sheet if they are not too large,  if the technical expertise to create a centralized AMC doesn’t exist,  or if effective resolution mechanisms already exist.

Much as with lenders,  there is usually a relatively clear distinction between how systemically or strategically important borrowers are handled and how those that aren’t are.

- For systemically important borrowers or strategically important ones,  policy makers generally take steps to ensure that the businesses remain intact as entities. In general this occurs through a restructuring of the debts to make the ongoing debt service manageable. This can occur through debt-for-equity swaps,  through reducing the existing debts,  lowering interest rates,  or terming out the borrowing. Occasionally policy makers also introduce new lending programs to these borrowers to ensure their ongoing liquidity. This process is often explicitly one of the goals of AMCs set up to manage bad debts.
- Nonsystemically important borrowers are usually left to restructure their loans with private lenders or are allowed to go bankrupt and are liquidated.
- Central governments often take steps to help reduce the debt burdens on the household sector. AMCs may also take steps to restructure debt burdens rather than foreclosing on the loans as part of their goal of maximizing recovery values.

#### Redistributing Wealth

Wealth gaps increase during bubbles and they become particularly galling for the less privileged during hard times. As a general rule,  if rich people share a budget with poor people and there is an economic downturn,  there will be economic and political conflict. It is during such times that populism on both the left and the right tends to emerge. How well the people and the political system handle this is key to how well the economy and the society weather the period. As shown below,  both inequality and populism are on the rise in the US today,  much as they were in the 1930s. In both cases,  the net worth of the top 0.1 percent of the population equaled approximately that of the bottom 90 percent combined.

In some cases,  raising taxes on the rich becomes politically attractive because the rich made a lot of money in the boom—especially those working in the financial sector—and are perceived to have caused the problems because of their greed. The central bank’s purchases of financial assets also disproportionately benefit the rich,  because the rich own many more such assets. Big political shifts to the left typically hasten redistributive efforts. This typically drives the rich to try to move their money in ways and to places that provide protection,  which itself has effects on asset and currency markets. It can also cause an economic “hollowing out” of those areas because the big income earners,  who are also the big income taxpayers,  leave,  reducing overall tax revenues and leading these areas to suffer sharp declines in property values and reductions in services.

Typically,  increased taxation takes the form of greater income,  property,  and consumption taxes because these forms of taxation are the most effective at raising revenues. Wealth and inheritance taxes are sometimes also increased though these typically raise very little money because so much wealth is illiquid that it is practically difficult to collect on,  and forcing the taxpayer to sell liquid assets to make their tax payments undermines capital formation. Regardless,  transfers rarely occur in amounts that contribute meaningfully to the deleveraging \(unless there are “revolutions” and huge amounts of property are nationalized\).

### 5\) The “Beautiful Deleveraging”

A “beautiful deleveraging” happens when the four levers are moved in a balanced way so as to reduce intolerable shocks and produce positive growth with falling debt burdens and acceptable inflation. More specifically,  deleveragings become beautiful when there is enough stimulation \(i.e.,  through “printing of money”/debt monetization and currency devaluation\) to offset the deflationary deleveraging forces \(austerity/defaults\) and bring the nominal growth rate above the nominal interest rate—but not so much stimulation that inflation is accelerated,  the currency is devaluated,  and a new debt bubble arises.

The best way of negating the deflationary depression is for the central bank to provide adequate liquidity and credit support,  and,  depending on different key entities’ needs for capital,  for the central government to provide that too. Recall that spending comes in the form of either money or credit. When increased spending cannot be financed with increased debt because there is too much debt relative to the amount of money there is to service the debt,  increased spending and debt-service relief must come from increased money. This means that the central bank has to increase the amount of money in the system.

The central bank can do this by lending against a wider range of collateral \(both of lower quality and longer maturity\) and also by buying \(monetizing\) lower-quality and/or longer-term debt. This produces relief and,  if it’s done in the right amounts,  allows a deleveraging to occur with positive growth. The right amounts are those that a\) neutralize what would otherwise be a deflationary credit market collapse and b\) get the nominal growth rate marginally above the nominal interest rate to tolerably spread out the deleveraging process.

So,  what do I mean by that? Basically,  income needs to grow faster than debt. For example: Let’s assume that a country going through a deleveraging has a debt-to-income ratio of 100 percent. That means that the amount of debt it has is the same as the amount of income the entire country makes in a year. Now think about the interest rate on that debt. Let’s say it’s 2 percent. If debt is 100 and the interest rate is 2 percent,  then if no debt is repaid it will be 102 after one year. If income is 100 and it grows at 1 percent,  then income will be 101,  so the debt burden will increase from 100/100 to 102/101. So for the burdens from existing debt not to increase,  nominal income growth must be higher than nominal interest rates,  and the higher the better \(provided it is not so high that it produces unacceptable inflation and/or unacceptable currency declines\).

People ask if printing money will raise inflation. It won’t if it offsets falling credit and the deflationary forces are balanced with this reflationary force. That’s not a theory—it’s been repeatedly proven out in history. Remember,  spending is what matters. A dollar of spending paid for with money has the same effect on prices as a dollar of spending paid for with credit. By “printing money,  ” the central bank can make up for the disappearance of credit with an increase in the amount of money. This “printing” takes the form of central bank purchases of government securities and nongovernment assets such as corporate securities,  equities,  and other assets,  which is reflected in money growing at an extremely fast rate at the same time as credit and real economic activity are contracting. Traditional economists see that as the velocity of money declining,  but it’s nothing of the sort. What is happening at such times is that credit destruction is being offset by money creation. If the balance between replacing credit and actively stimulating the economy is right,  this isn’t inflationary.

But there is such a thing as abusive use of stimulants. Because stimulants work so well relative to the alternatives,  there is a real risk that they can be abused,  causing an “ugly inflationary deleveraging” \(like the Weimar hyperinflation of the 1920s,  or those in Argentina and Brazil in the 1980s\). The key is to avoid printing too much money. If policy makers achieve the right balance,  a deleveraging isn’t so dramatic. Getting this balance right is much more difficult in countries that have a large percentage of debt denominated in foreign currency and owned by foreign investors \(as in Weimar Germany and the South American countries\) because that debt can’t be monetized or restructured as easily.

Printing money/debt monetization and government guarantees are inevitable in depressions in which interest rate cuts won’t work,  though these tools are of little value in countries that are constrained from printing or don’t have assets to back printing up and can’t easily negotiate the redistributions of the debt burdens. All of the deleveragings that we have studied \(which is most of those that occurred over the past hundred years\) eventually led to big waves of money creation,  fiscal deficits,  and currency devaluations \(against gold,  commodities,  and stocks\). In different cases,  policy makers have varied which exact combination of the levers they used,  typically as a function of the nature of their monetary systems. The chart below conveys the archetypal path of money printing in deflationary deleveragings over the 21 cases. The money printing occurs in two classic waves—central banks first provide liquidity to stressed institutions,  and then they conduct large-scale asset purchases to broadly stimulate the economy.

Typically,  governments with gold-,  commodity-,  or foreign-currency-pegged money systems are forced to have tighter monetary policies to protect the value of their currency than governments with fiat monetary systems. But eventually the debt contractions become so painful that they relent,  break the link,  and print \(i.e.,  either they abandon these systems or change the amount/pricing of the commodity that they will exchange for a unit of money\). For example,  when the value of the dollar \(and therefore the amount of money\) was tied to gold during the Great Depression,  suspending the promise to convert dollars into gold so that the currency could be devalued and more money created was key to creating the bottoms in the stock and commodity markets and the economy. Printing money,  making asset purchases,  and providing guarantees were much easier to do in the 2008 financial crisis,  as they didn’t require a legalized and official change in the currency regime. The chart below shows the archetypal path of gold prices. In the US Great Depression,  gold rose overnight when Roosevelt broke the gold peg,  and during the more recent financial crisis,  Fed moves helped push down the value of the dollar versus all currencies,  including gold.

In the end,  policy makers always print. That is because austerity causes more pain than benefit,  big restructurings wipe out too much wealth too fast,  and transfers of wealth from haves to have-nots don’t happen in sufficient size without revolutions. Also,  printing money is not inflationary if the size and character of the money creation offsets the size and character of the credit contraction. It is simply negating deflation. In virtually all past deleveragings,  policy makers had to discover this for themselves after they first tried other paths without satisfactory results. History has shown that those who did it quickly and well \(like the US in 2008–09\) have derived much better results than those who did it late \(like the US in 1930–33\).

The table below summarizes the typical amount of printing and currency devaluation required to create the turn from a depression to a “beautiful deleveraging.” On average the printing of money has been around 4 percent of GDP per year. There is a large initial currency devaluation of around 50 percent against gold,  and deficits widen to about 6 percent of GDP. On average,  this aggressive stimulation comes two to three years into the depression,  after stocks have fallen more than 50 percent,  economic activity has fallen about 10 percent,  and unemployment has risen to around 10 to 15 percent,  though there is a lot of variation.

I’m providing these numbers only as broad indicators,  since circumstances vary considerably. When looking at the differences \(which are very interesting but beyond the scope of this study\),  it is clear that when monetary and fiscal policies are rolled out faster and smarter,  the results are much better than these averages.

To reiterate,  the key to having a beautiful deleveraging lies in balancing the inflationary forces against the deflationary ones. That’s because too much money printing can also produce an ugly inflationary deleveraging \(which we will go through later\). The right amounts of stimulus are those that a\) neutralize what would otherwise be a deflationary credit-market collapse and b\) get the nominal growth rate above the nominal interest rate by enough to relieve the debt burdens,  but not by so much that it leads to a run on debt assets.

In summary,  when all is said and done,  only a few things distinguish whether a deleveraging is managed well or poorly. I have outlined them below. A lot of pain can be avoided if policy makers can learn from the common pitfalls and understand the policies characteristic of beautiful deleveragings.

### 6\) “Pushing on a String”

Late in the long-term debt cycle,  central bankers sometimes struggle to convert their stimulative policies into increased spending because the effects of lowering interest rates and central banks’ purchases of debt assets have diminished. At such times the economy enters a period of low growth and low returns on assets,  and central bankers have to move to other forms of monetary stimulation in which money and credit go more directly to support spenders. When policy makers faced these conditions in the 1930s,  they coined the phrase “pushing on a string.” One of the biggest risks at this stage is that if there is too much printing of money/monetization and too severe a currency devaluation relative to the amounts of the deflationary alternatives,  an “ugly inflationary deleveraging” can occur.

To help understand the different kinds of monetary policies that can be used throughout a deleveraging,  I think of them as coming in three different styles,  each with its own effects on the economy and markets.

#### ****Monetary Policy 1

**Interest-rate driven [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] \(which I’ll call Monetary Policy 1\) is the most effective because it has the broadest impact on the economy.** When central banks reduce interest rates,  they stimulate the economy by a\) producing a positive wealth effect \(because the lower interest rate raises the present value of most investments\); b\) making it easier to buy items on credit \(because the monthly payments decline\),  raising demand—especially for interest-rate-sensitive items like durable goods and housing; and c\) reducing debt-service burdens \(which improves cash flows and spending\). MP1 is typically the first approach to a debt crisis,  but when short-term interest rates hit around 0 percent,  it no longer works effectively,  so central banks must go to the second type.

#### Monetary Policy 2

**“Quantitative easing” \(QE\) as it is now called \(i.e.,  “printing money” and buying financial assets,  typically debt assets\),  is Monetary Policy 2.** It works by affecting the behavior of investors/savers as opposed to borrowers/spenders,  because it is driven by purchases of financial assets,  typically debt assets that impact investors/savers the most. When the central bank buys a bond,  it gives investors/savers cash,  which they typically use to buy another financial asset that they think is more attractive. What they do with that money and credit makes all the difference in the world. When they invest in the sort of assets that finance spending,  that stimulates the economy. When they invest in those that don’t \(such as financial assets\),  there must be very large market gains before any money trickles down into spending—and that spending comes more from those who have enjoyed the market gains than from those who haven’t. In other words,  QE certainly benefits investors/savers \(i.e.,  those who own financial assets\) much more than people who don’t,  thus widening the wealth gap.

While MP2 is generally less effective than interest-rate changes,  it is most effective when risk and liquidity premiums are large,  because it causes those premiums to fall. When risk premiums are large,  and money is added to the system,  actual risks are reduced at the same time that there is more money seeking returns,  which triggers purchases of riskier assets that are offering higher expected returns,  driving their prices up and producing a positive wealth effect.

But over time,  the use of QE to stimulate the economy declines in effectiveness because risk premiums are pushed down and asset prices are pushed up to levels beyond which they are difficult to push further,  and the wealth effect diminishes. **In other words,  at higher prices and lower expected returns,  the compensation for taking risk becomes too small to get investors to bid prices up,  which would drive prospective returns down further.** In fact,  the reward-to-risk ratio could make those who are long a lot of assets view that terribly returning asset called cash as more appealing. As a result,  QE becomes less and less effective. If they provide QE and private credit growth doesn’t pick up,  policy makers feel like they are pushing on a string.

At this stage,  policy makers sometimes monetize debt in even larger quantities in an attempt to compensate for its declining effectiveness. While this can help for a bit,  there is a real risk that prolonged monetization will lead people to question the currency’s suitability as a store hold of value. This can lead them to start moving to alternative currencies,  such as gold. The fundamental economic challenge most economies have in this phase is that the claims on purchasing power are greater than the abilities to meet them.

Think of it this way: There are only goods and services. Financial assets are claims on them. In other words,  holders of investments/assets \(i.e.,  capitalists-investors\) believe that they can convert their holdings into purchasing power to get goods and services. At the same time,  workers expect to be able to exchange a unit’s worth of their contribution to the production of goods and services into buying power for goods and services. But since debt/money/currency have no intrinsic value,  the claims on them are greater than the value of what they are supposed to be able to buy,  so they have to be devalued or restructured. In other words,  when there are too many debt liabilities/assets,  they either have to be reduced via [[Class Slide 4-Restructuring Debt Outside Bankruptcy|Debt Restructuring ]]s or monetized. Policy makers tend to use monetization at this stage primarily because it is stimulative rather than contractionary. But monetization simply swaps one IOU \(debt\) for another \(newly printed money\). The situation is analogous to a Ponzi scheme. Since there aren’t enough goods and services likely to be produced to back up all the IOUs,  there’s a worry that people may not be willing to work in return for IOUs forever.

Low interest rates together with low premiums on risky assets pose a structural challenge for [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]]. With Monetary Policy 1 \(interest rates\) and Monetary Policy 2 \(QE\) at their limits,  the central bank has very little ability to provide stimulus through these two channels—i.e.,  [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] has little “gas in the tank.” This typically happens in the later years of the long-term debt cycle \(e.g.,  1937-38 and now in the US\),  which can lead to “pushing on a string.” When this happens,  policy makers need to look beyond QE to the new forms of monetary and fiscal policy characterized by Monetary Policy 3.

#### Monetary Policy 3

**Monetary Policy 3 puts money more directly into the hands of spenders instead of investors/savers and incentivizes them to spend it.** Because wealthy people have fewer incentives to spend the incremental money and credit they get than less wealthy people,  when the wealth gap is large and the economy is weak,  directing spending opportunities at less wealthy people is more productive.

Logic and history show us that there is a continuum of actions to stimulate spending that have varying degrees of control to them. At one end are coordinated fiscal and monetary actions,  in which fiscal policy makers provide stimulus directly through government spending or indirectly by providing incentives for nongovernment entities to spend. At the other end,  the central bank can provide “helicopter money” by sending cash directly to citizens without coordination with fiscal policy makers. Typically,  though not always,  there is a coordination of [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] and fiscal policy in a way that creates incentives for people to spend on goods and services. Central banks can also exert influence through macroprudential policies that help to shape things in ways that are similar to how fiscal policies might. For simplicity,  I have organized that continuum and provided references to specific prior cases of each below.

- **An increase in debt-financed fiscal spending.** Sometimes this is paired with QE that buys most of the new issuance \(e.g.,  in Japan in the 1930s,  US during World War II,  US and UK in the 2000s\).
- **Increase in debt-financed fiscal spending,  where the Treasury isn’t on the hook for the debt**,  because:
	- – The central bank can print money to cover debt payments \(e.g.,  Germany in the 1930s\).
	- – The central bank can lend to entities other than the government that will use it for stimulus projects \(e.g.,  lending to development banks in China in 2008\).
- **Not bothering to go through issuing debt,  and instead giving newly printed money directly to the government to spend.** Past cases have included printing fiat currency \(e.g.,  in Imperial China,  the American Revolution,  the US Civil War,  Germany in the 1930s,  and the UK during World War I\) or debasing hard currency \(Ancient Rome,  Imperial China,  16th-century England\).
- **Printing money and doing direct cash transfers to households \(i.e.,  “helicopter money”\).** When we refer to “helicopter money,  ” we mean directing money into the hands of spenders \(e.g.,  US veterans’ bonuses during the Great Depression,  Imperial China\). How that money is directed could take different forms—the basic variants are either to direct the same amount to everyone or aim for some degree of helping one or more groups over others \(e.g.,  giving money to the poor rather than to the rich\). The money can be provided as a one-off or over time \(perhaps as a universal basic income\). All of these variants can be paired with an incentive to spend it—such as the money disappearing if it’s not spent within a year. The money could also be directed to specific investment accounts \(like retirement,  education,  or accounts earmarked for small-business investments\) targeted toward socially desirable spending/investment. Another potential way to craft the policy is to distribute returns/holdings from QE to households instead of to the government.
- **Big debt write-down accompanied by big money creation** \(the “year of Jubilee”\) as occurred in Ancient Rome,  the Great Depression,  and Iceland.

While I won’t offer opinions on each of these,  I will say that the most effective approaches involve fiscal/monetary coordination,  because that ensures that both the providing and the spending of money will occur. If central banks just give people money \(helicopter money\),  that’s typically less adequate than giving them that money with incentives to spend it. However,  sometimes it is difficult for those who set [[Lecture 7-Risk and Return of Bonds#7.6 Asset price reactions to monetary policy surprises|monetary policy]] to coordinate with those who set fiscal policy,  in which case other approaches are used.

Also,  keep in mind that sometimes the policies don’t fall exactly into these categories,  as they have elements of more than one of them. For example,  if the government gives a tax break,  that’s probably not helicopter money,  but it depends on how it’s financed. The government can also spend money directly without a loan financed by the central bank—that is helicopter money through fiscal channels.

While central banks influence the costs and availabilities of credit for the economy as whole,  they also have powers to influence the costs and availabilities of credit for targeted parts of the financial system through their regulatory authorities. These policies,  which are called macroprudential policies,  are especially important when it’s desirable to differentiate entities—e.g.,  when it is desirable to restrict credit to an overly indebted area while simultaneously stimulating the rest of the economy,  or when its desirable to provide credit to some targeted entities but not provide it broadly. Macroprudential policies take numerous forms that are valuable in different ways in all seven stages of the big debt cycle. Because explaining them here would require too much of a digression,  they are explained in some depth in the Appendix.

### 7\) Normalization

Eventually the system gets back to normal,  though the recovery in economic activity and capital formation tends to be slow,  even during a beautiful deleveraging. It typically takes roughly 5 to 10 years \(hence the term “lost decade”\) for real economic activity to reach its former peak level. And it typically takes longer,  around a decade,  for stock prices to reach former highs,  because it takes a very long time for investors to become comfortable taking the risk of holding equities again \(i.e.,  equity risk premiums are high\).
