# 5.1 Introduction  

In order to say anything concrete about the asset supply and demand of individuals we have to formalize the decision problem faced by individuals. We assume that individuals have preferences for consumption and must choose between different consumption plans, i.e. plans for how much to consume at different points in time and in different states of the world. The financial market allows individuals to reallocate consumption over time and over states and hence obtain a consumption plan different from their endowment.  

Although an individual will typically obtain utility from consumption at many different dates (or in many different periods), we will first address the simpler case with consumption at only one future point in time. In such a setting a "consumption plan' is simply a random variable representing the consumption at that date. Even in one-period models individuals should be allowed to consume both at the beginning of the period and at the end of the period, but we will first ignore the influence of current consumption on the well-being of the individual. We do that since current consumption is certain and we want to focus on how preferences for uncertain consumption can be represented, but also to simplify the notation and analysis somewhat. Since we have in mind a one-period economy, we basically have to model preferences for end-of-period consumption.  

Sections 5.2-5.4 discuss how to represent individual preferences in a tractable way. We will demonstrate that under some fundamental assumptions ("axioms') on individual behavior, the preferences can be modeled by a utility index which to each consumption plan assigns a real number with higher numbers to the more preferred plans. Under an additional axiom we can represent the preferences in terms of expected utility, which is even simpler to work with and used in most models of financial economics. Section 5.5 defines and discusses the important concept of risk aversion. Section 5.6 introduces the utility functions that are typically applied in models of financial economics and provides a short discussion of which utility functions and levels of risk aversions that seem to be reasonable for representing the decisions of individuals. In Section 5.7 we discuss extensions to preferences for consumption at more than one point in time.  

There is a large literature on how to model the preferences of individuals for uncertain outcomes and the presentation here is by no means exhaustive. The literature dates back at least to Swiss mathematician Daniel Bernoulli in 1738 (see English translation in Bernoulli (1954), but was put on a firm formal setting by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944). For some recent textbook presentations on a similar level as the one given here, see Huang and Litzenberger (1988, Ch. 1), Kreps (1990, Ch. 3), Gollier (2001, Chs. 1-3), and Danthine and Donaldson (2002, Ch. 2).  
