---
tags:
  - financial_markets
  - government_regulation
  - market_failure
  - regulatory_approaches
  - securities_markets
aliases:
  - Market Regulation
  - Regulation Overview
key_concepts:
  - Financial regulators powers
  - Licensing, chartering, registration
  - Maintain market competition
  - Prevent market failure
  - Protect investors and taxpayers
---

# Regulation of Trading and Securities Markets  

# 5.1 REGULATORY APPROACHESAND THE REGULATORY BALANCE  

The primary purpose of government regulation of competitive markets is to prevent market failure or collapse. Proponents of regulation argue that financial markets, left unregulated, will tend towards loss of competition, stability, efficiency, and credibility, causing individuals and firms to withdraw from participation. This loss of participation weakens the viability of financial markets, leading to partial or complete market failure. Senator Edmund Muskie, in his 1970 introduction of what was to become the Securities 1 Investor Protection Act to the Senate, stated :  

The economic function of the securities markets is to channel individual institutional savings to private industry and thereby contribute to the growth of capital investment. Without strong capital markets it would be difficult for our national economy to sustain continued growth: indeed, the state of U.S. capital market development, more advanced than that of any other industrial country, is an important contributing factor in the rapid economic growth this country has experienced. Securities brokers support the proper functioning of these markets by maintaining a constant flow of debt and equity instruments. The continued financial wellbeing of the economy thus depends, in part, on public willingness to entrust assets to the securities industry.  

The purpose of government regulation and its enforcement is to accomplish what the market on its own cannot—establishment of a set of rules intended to maintain market competition, stability, efficiency, and credibility. Governments also use regulation to protect consumers, investors, and taxpayers and to prevent anti-trust and various illegal activities. By the mid-1930s, the United States had developed the most comprehensive securities regulatory system in the world. Other countries and the European Union have since developed regulatory systems that resemble in many respects the U.S. system.  
# Regulatory Powers  

Financial regulators have a variety of powers to meet their goals. These powers vary among agencies and can be exercised by combinations of national, state, and local authorities. Primary regulatory powers can be categorized as follows (see  Congressional Research Service [2020] ):  

•  Licensing, Chartering, and Registration : Intended to ensure that financial professionals and institutions obtain and maintain appropriate credentials and suitable qualifications for conduct of their permitted activities and agree to conduct themselves in a manner consistent with regulations and practices set forth by the regulator.

 •  Rulemaking : Regulators develop and issue specific regulations, often with the assistance of members of the profession, intended to ensure fulfillment of statutory mandates.

 •  Oversight and Supervision : Regulators are empowered by governments, often with the assistance of professional associations, to monitor and ensure regulatory compliance.

 •  Enforcement : Regulators can compel regulatory compliance. Many regulators can revoke licenses, charters, and registration, administer fines and other penalties, obtain or issue cease and desist orders, and pursue criminal or civil court actions as well as administrative proceedings and arbitration s.

 •  Resolution : In some instances, regulators have the power to resolve a failing financial institution by initiating conservator ship (i.e., the regulator takes control of the firm) or receivership (i.e., the regulator liquidates the firm) or by forcing the firm into a bankruptcy process.  

# Regulatory Approaches  

Regulatory approaches around the world can be strikingly different despite the coordination efforts of global organizations, and the extent to which regulatory structures for non-U.S. securities industries seem to resemble that of the U.S. securities regulatory authorities. Regulatory authorities tend to take some combination of two basic approaches to designing a regulatory system:  

•  Rules-based approach , where authorities set forth specific and detailed prescriptive rules to which securities markets participants must adhere. Securities regulatory authorities taking this approach often focus on process and risk, where the authority considers whether there is a potential market failure or abuse that needs to be addressed and conducts an analysis to determine how to address the problem given the constraint of limited resources. Rules-based regulation is frequently implemented as a preventive mechanism and is often associated with greater rigidity.

 •  Principles-based approach , where authorities set forth a small number of regulatory objectives and principles, focusing on results and outcomes rather than processes, and granting regulatory authorities and business firm operating and compliance officers more judgment in ensuring that policy objectives are being fulfilled.  

While all regulatory authorities have used some mix of these two approaches, the United States has tended to have more of a rules-based orientation while the United Kingdom has been the primary proponent of a principles-based orientation that is more popular with the industry. Australia (Australia Securities and Investment Commission) also employs a principles-based approach and has relatively few regulators. China employs a mix of both approaches as it moves somewhat away from a principles-based approach after its 2015 financial crisis.  
Proponents of principles-based approaches argue that regulators waste less time on trivial rules-based minutiae and spend more time on meaningful deviations from appropriate practices. In addition, principles-based approaches can ease the compliance efforts of firms that engage in proper practices. On the other hand, some observers argue that principlesbased regulators (such as the UK Financial Conduct Authority) tend to find very few violations and respond to violations with a light touch. This raises the question of whether few violations actually occur under this approach or are simply not discovered. Principlesbased regulation might require more manpower and other regulatory resources to monitor and enforce, which might be in shortest supply when they are needed most. For example, such monitoring and enforcement problems might be most acute in a political environment where regulators are contemptuous of regulations or maintain close relationships with the firms that they monitor.  

# The Regulatory Balance  

Running is an important activity for many people, both for health and for recreation purposes. However, dozens of people die every year from running, dozens more than die from trading securities. Yet, there are thousands of pages of federal regulation devoted to trading and none devoted to running. Why are securities markets so heavily regulated? Securities markets with coordinated mass participation are essential to the economy whereas running is satisfying either as a solo or as an uncoordinated social activity. Securities markets confer substantial rewards to those with superior information and the ability to speedily react to it. Criminals and unethical market participants are attracted to these rewards and many investors, whose capital is needed in the marketplace, are readily abused. Systemic failure of securities markets can cause economic collapse. Markets rife with fraud and adverse selection, a result of information asymmetry, raise the cost of capital to firms, drive capital and businesses to foreign markets, and restrict economic growth.  

The problem of asymmetric information availability, probably the most pressing issue in securities markets, can be ameliorated with market-based measures such as reputation, monitoring, branding, bonding, independent certification, and various signaling mechanisms. However, government-based regulation by mandating truthful information disclosure, enforcing antifraud regulations and working with a civil liability system can be a crucial supplement to market-based measures, particularly when dealing with criminal and unethical market participants. Truthful information disclosure confers significant social benefits to creditors, employees and consumers, adding to the significant private benefits taken by shareholders. Fraudulent disclosure distorts business practices, distorts competition, leads to contagion and inhibits economic learning (e.g., false information disclosures by one bank detract from investors’ abilities to analyze another bank).  
While excessive, duplicated, overlapping, or poorly designed regulation impairs markets, all regulation, even well-designed regulation, is expensive (see Section 5.8 on regulatory costs). We will discuss in greater detail the costs, both direct and indirect, of securities regulation later in this chapter in Section 5.8, as well as in Chapter 13, Trading Gone Awry.  

# 5.2 PRE-1930s SECURITIES REGULATION: THE BACKGROUND  

Securities market regulation, with some notable exceptions, is primarily a fairly recent phenomenon. Securities market abuses were, for the most part, limited by more general statutes, common law and court decisions (e.g.,  Strong v. Repide, 1909 , discussed later in Sections 5.4 and 13.2) related to fraud and other offenses. However, there were a few earlier attempts to enact certain securities market regulations, and these earlier efforts provided the framework for more modern regulation. For example, under King Edward I in 1285, broker licensure was instituted after the finding that English brokers provided less satisfactory service than their Italian counterparts. Active securities trading in London late in the 17th century accompanied by a monetary crisis in 1695 led to the  Brokers Act of 1696 , which required stock brokers to be licensed and limited the number of these licenses to 100 for approximately 10 years. Following the South Sea Bubble, but before the South Sea Company’s crash, the  1720 Bubble Act  passed in Britain only shortly after the creation of what was to become the London Stock Exchange (See Section 2.2). The Act, which the South Sea Company hoped would preserve its monopoly, provided for the issuance of security prospectuses and prohibited certain types of trading fraud, but was ultimately repealed in 1825 (See  Mahoney, 2015 ). The  Companies Act of 1844  provided once again for company issuances of prospectuses, and the  Companies Act of 1867  along with subsequent legislation provided for specific details in those prospectuses. This 19th-century British legislation, based largely on full disclosure of material information, served as an important conceptual foundation to 1930s U.S. securities legislation.  

Securities legislation activity in the United States was very slow to start. Massachusetts enacted one of the earliest securities regulations in 1852, requiring railroad companies to certify that “responsible parties” had subscribed to their stock. The Constitution of the State of California signed in 1879 prohibited the sale of stock on margin. At the federal level, Congress made a small number of early attempts to regulate securities trading. For example, it passed and then quickly repealed the  Anti-Gold Futures Act of 1864 , intending to restrict trading in gold and exchange contracts. Congress attempted to regulate agricultural futures trading with the  Future Trading Act of 1921 , but this Act was found by the U.S. Supreme Court to be unconstitutional.  

# The Blue Sky Laws  

In the early 1900s, several states passed limited legislation to regulate securities markets. These earlier laws sought to prevent issuance of securities that were considered to be unfair or did not promise a “fair return.” Securities were potentially subject to merit tests. For example, in response to numerous incidents of brokers having sold worthless securities of sham companies, Kansas enacted a securities law in 1911 requiring registration of brokers and securities. These worthless securities were said to be backed by “nothing but the blue skies of Kansas.” This state legislation was considered to be the first of state  blue sky laws  intended to regulate securities markets.  
Prior to the 1930s, most regulation of U.S. securities markets was provided by these so-called blue sky laws, which critics often regarded as permitting “anything under the blue sky.” The  Uniform Securities Act  was adopted by a number of states as early as 1930 in an effort to coordinate the state-based securities legislation. The Act has been revised extensively over the years, but has not been adopted by all states, including New York.  

# New York State Regulation and Enforcement  

While most early blue sky laws tended to be rather ineffective against many securities markets abuses, a small number of state securities laws can be applied effectively to combat a variety of financial wrongdoings, even when the U.S. Justice Department and the SEC cannot or will not pursue corrective action. In particular, New York State’s Martin Act, enacted in 1921, amended several times and creatively applied by several New York State attorneys general, notably Albert Ottinger and Elliott Spitzer, has been used to collect billions of dollars in fines and settlements and to force security firms to modify fraudulent and questionable practices. For example, in 2001, Spitzer used the extraordinary investigatory powers conferred by the Martin Act to launch an investigation into conflicted investment advice provided by Merrill Lynch’s star technology analyst, Henry Blodgett, who hyped stocks marketed by Merrill’s investment banking department to investors while trashing them in private emails. Merrill settled by paying   $\S100$   million in fines and changing its method for compensating stock analysts, after seeing its stock price drop by  $\S5$   billion in a single week after Spitzer publicly leveled his accusations. Similar actions based on similar accusations were taken against Salomon Smith Barney and 9 other investment banks yielding a combined total of   $\S1.4$   billion in fines. More recently, New York State Attorney General Eric Schneider man alleged that the dark pool of Barclays bank, Barclays LX, had “falsified marketing material purporting to show the extent and type of high frequency activity in its dark pool,” and ultimately extracted settlements of  $\S154$   million from Barclays and Credit Suisse Securities. Some critics argue that the Martin Act has been abused by New York attorneys general to extort excess payments from financial institutions and to generate publicity to promote their efforts to seek higher office (e.g., Ottinger, Jacob Javits, Spitzer, and Andrew Cuomo have been so accused).  

How does New York’s Martin Act enhance the attorney general’s investigator y powers and prosecutor i al leverage? First, the Act applies to all fraudulent securities transactions that occur, have victims or are perpetrated by firms with a presence in New York. This applies to nearly all large financial institutions. The Martin Act gives wide subpoena and evidence-gathering power to attorneys general, even in the absence of probable cause or a Grand Jury. Prosecutors have the option to release relevant documents to the public, risking reputation al damage to accused firms and individuals. This broad investigator y power gives the attorney general significant tactical advantages, encouraging defendant cooperation. Unlike those in federal fraud cases, convictions under the Martin Act do not require proof of intent to defraud or even that fraud victims suffered monetary losses, only that the accused “made a material misrepresentation or omission during a securities transaction” ( Sgambati, 2016 ).  
# Market Abuses: An Introduction  

However, in recent years, and despite many criticisms and shortcomings, some observers consider the United States to have the most effective national securities regulatory system in the world. Securities market regulation and enforcement are currently provided by a web of legislation, regulatory agencies, and professional associations. This regulation is largely intended to manage systemic risk, prevent price manipulation, and protect the investing public against securities market abuses. The following are just a few of the many types of activities and abuses such regulation is intended to 3 restrict :  

•  Wash sales  are transactions intended to create the appearance of sales where, in effect, no sales actually take place. Wash sales may be intended to manipulate security prices (e.g., conspirators execute transactions with one another to create records of sales prices to deceive other participants in the market). Wash sales may also involve the sale of securities for tax purposes with offsetting transactions to repurchase the securities or related instruments.

 •  Corners  involve the purchase a sufficient level of a given security to obtain market power over its price.

 •  Churning  occurs when a broker executes an inordinately large number of transactions on a client’s account for the purpose of securing commissions.

 •  Pools  exist when market participants combine their resources to obtain a large position in a security in order to manipulate its price.

 •  Fraud  constitutes an intentional deception or misrepresentation for the purpose of securing a profit.

 •  Inside trading  constitutes trading on the basis of material nonpublic information.  

These and other market abuses might have been among the causes of the stock market crash of 1929. On September 3, 1929, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) had reached a high of 381; by July 8, 1932, it had fallen to a low of 41. Numerous other economic and structural problems have been associated with this crash including massive unemployment, deflation, failure of over 5000 banks, and so on. Market abuses of the 1920s have often been blamed for contributing to the Great Crash and perhaps to the Great Depression as well (the causes of the Great Depression remain subject to much controversy). Nevertheless, the first major federal efforts at curbing market abuses resulted from these tumultuous events.  

3 There will be more discussion of securities markets abuses in Chapter 13.  
# 5.3 U.S. SECURITIES MARKET LEGISLATION: THE FOUNDATION  

Beginning in the 1930s, a series of regulatory acts were proposed to prevent or mitigate market failures such as the Great Crash of 1929. The financial system was in shambles due to the devastated economy, and there was a clear need to restore integrity to financial markets to rebuild the economy. Government involvement was clearly needed to develop a much-needed regulatory system. The following sections discuss some of the major U.S. legislative acts intended to restrict abuses such as those discussed above and to promote fairness and transparency in the securities markets. Such sweeping legislation was made possible, in part, due to overwhelming Democrat majorities elected to both houses of Congress and the election of President Roosevelt in 1932. Twenty-five days after his inauguration in 1933, President Roosevelt asked Congress for a new law that would “put the burden of telling the whole truth on the seller” of securities, and, referring to the  caveat 4 emptor  rule generally preferred in business circles, added: “Let the seller also beware.” The financial community was in a poor position to effectively protest this imposition of regulation at the height of the Great Depression, though many members did argue that the Act would be burdensome, stifle entrepreneurship, drive business offshore and make independent directors reluctant to sit on corporate boards. Some institutions even threatened to protest the Act by refusing to bring new issues of stock to the market in a “Wall Street strike.”  

# The Bedrock: The Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934  

The Securities Act of 1933 , sometimes called the “Truth in Securities Law,” deals primarily with new issues of securities. The Act requires that issuers and underwriters provide financial and other significant information concerning securities offered for public sale. In addition, the Act prohibits deceit, misrepresentations, and other fraud in the sale of securities. Unlike most of the “blue skies laws” that focused on the merits of securities, the Securities Act focused on making full, accurate and timely information available to prospective investors in securities. Its major provisions are as follows:  

•  All primary issues must be registered with an appropriate government agency (later to be the Securities Exchange Commission or SEC). The registration will include proper statements and documentation.

 •  A prospectus must accompany each new issue. This prospectus must contain a complete and accurate accounting of the firm’s condition, risks, and prospects, and state how the proceeds of the new issue will be used.

 •  Small and private issues are exempt from the registration provisions. In addition, SEC Rule 415 (shelf registration) of 1982 allows up two years for securities to actually be issued after completing the SEC registration process.

 •  Firms, officers of firms, and underwriters are prohibited from making false statements regarding their new issues, and may be criminally liable for doing so. The Securities Exchange Act of 1934  was primarily intended to improve information avail  
ability and to prevent price manipulation. While it was signed into law shortly after the Securities Act of 1933, it was brought forth by Congress at roughly the same time and was intended to complement the Securities Act to form the framework for the new U.S. securities regulatory system. Whereas the Securities Act of 1933 dealt mainly with primary issues, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 dealt mainly with secondary markets, accomplishing the following:  

•  Established the SEC as the nation’s primary federal securities regulatory authority.

 •  Provided for annual and other periodic reporting by public companies.

 •  Limited insider trading activity.

 •  Provided rules for proxy solicitation.

 •  Required registration of exchanges.

 •  Provided for credit regulation: Regulations T (for brokerage firms) and U (for nonbroker lenders) permit the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve to set margin requirements. Since 1974, investors have been required to post  $50\%$   margin (deposit or collateral) when purchasing stock on margin. FINRA Rule 2520 permits pattern day traders   $25\%$   initial margin requirements (subject to a  $\S25{,}000$   account equity balance).

 •  Subjected institutions to the Net Capital Rule, amended in 1975, imposing limits on broker-dealer debt-to-net capital ratios. Certain exceptions were made in 2004 to five of the largest institutions, all of which were bankrupted, merged, or otherwise suffered significant financial distress in the financial market crisis of 2008.

 •  Prohibited securities price manipulation.  

# Additional Major Depression-Era Legislation  

During the 1920s, banks were heavily engaged in trading, investments in riskier securities, and underwriting of securities. Higher risk nonbanking activities led to bank failures. The  Banking Acts of 1933 (Glass Steagall)  was motivated by the failure of thousands of banks.   Glass Steagall was intended to help restore faith in the banking system and prevent a similar crisis from reoccurring. This law fundamentally altered the U.S. banking system. There were three very important features of the legislation. First, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) was created to provide federal insurance on bank deposits (subject to a current  $\S250{,}000$   ceiling). The second provision (and most relevant to trading) of the Glass-Steagall Act was the imposition of restrictions on the activities of commercial banks. It prevented commercial banks from underwriting securities, trading with the public (excepting certain U.S. government and municipal bonds and real estate loans), and owning risky securities such as corporate stocks and bonds. These regulations separating financial functions were largely in response to the fact that many banks in 1933 had lost much of depositors’ money to trading securities and in their securities underwriting services. Much of this provision was relaxed by various court decisions, regulator policy, and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999, with significant consequences.   The third important provision of the Glass-Steagall Act placed various regulations on the interest rates banks were allowed to pay   $(\mathrm{Reg}\ \mathrm{Q})$  , although most of these provisions were relaxed in the 1980s.  
The Commodity Exchange Act of 1936  provided for regulation of commodities and futures trading markets by the Department of Agriculture and required all futures and commodity options to be traded on organized exchanges. Ultimately, the Act led to the 1974 establishment of the Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).  

The Maloney Act of 1938  was essentially an amendment to Section 15. A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. It provided for the self-regulation of the over-the-counter (OTC) markets, leading to the establishment of the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD, which merged into FINRA approximately 70 years later). It provided that the SEC can overrule the NASD and provided for NASD penalties. The Act has been hailed as “an especially provocative exercise of governmental power by a private organization” (see Hed-Hofmann, 1965 ).  

The Trust Indenture Act of 1939  provided that issuers of bonds must clearly specify rights of their purchasers in an agreement known as a  trust indenture , provide bond trustees with periodic financial reports, and that the trustee not impair purchasers’ right or willingness to sue the issuing corporation. Essentially, this Act extended parts of the Securities Act of 1933 to primary bond markets.  

The Investment Companies Act of 1940  extended the Securities Act and the Securities and Exchange Act to investment companies such as mutual funds, which were not prevalent prior to the 1930s. This Act provided that investment companies must:  

1.  avoid fraudulent practices.

 2.  fully disclose financial statements.

 3.  distribute prospectuses.

 4.  publish statements outlining goals, which will not be changed without appropriate process.

 5.  limit issuance of debt.

 6.  follow uniform accounting procedures.

 7.  operate the fund to benefit owners, not managers.  

The Investment Advisors Act of 1940  requires advisors and certain investment institutions who provide clients with paid investment advice to register with the SEC. The Act focused more on NASD (now FINRA) and the SEC being able to identify those acting as investment advisors than on regulating and restricting their activities. However, the Act did specify certain illegal advertising practices by advisors. The Investment Advisors Act also established the  fiduciary standard , which holds that a  Registered Investment Advisor  must put her client’s interests above her own, following the very best course of action, regardless of how it affects the advisor personally. That is, the advisor’s primary loyalty is to the client. The  suitability standard  is less strict than the fiduciary standard, with the suitability standard holding that advisors must provide clients with suitable advice, appropriate to the client’s needs, but not necessarily the best advice, as long as it is suitable (see FINRA Rule 2111).  

# 6 See  Markham (2010) .  
In contrast to the fiduciary standard applicable to the registered investment advisor, the advisor’s first loyalty under the suitability standard is to her employer or to herself. The Act was amended in 1996 to require only those advisors with over   $\S25$   million under management to register, although other advisors may register as well.  

# 5.4 CRISES AND UPDATING THE REGULATORY SYSTEM  

As in the 1930s, most subsequent securities market legislation was born of securities market booms and resulting crashes. This regulatory development process has often been criticized as “fighting the last war,” in that much legislation seems intended to prevent the most recently occurring crisis rather than the next potential crisis.  

# The 1960s Go-Go Years and Reform  

The securities brokerage industry underwent another crisis in the late 1960s, with many firms failing due to their inability to handle their vastly increased volume of paperwork. Brokers during the paperwork crisis struggled with their unprecedented success as the average NYSE daily trading volume increased from 3,042,000 shares in 1960 to 12,971,486 in 1968. Major firms such as Goodbody & Co., Pickard & Co., and F.I. Dupont, Glore Forgan & Co. either failed or had to be rescued. Hundreds of millions of dollars in stock certificates vanished, at least some due to organized crime, while billions of dollars in transactions failed. Senator Edmund Muskie introduced legislation to address this market failure and to restore investor confidence in markets. The  Securities Investor Protection Act of 1970  was passed, and provided for the establishment of the  Security Investors Protection Corporation  (SIPC) to insure accounts of brokerage clients. SIPC is funded with brokerage firm dues and protects clients from losses due to brokerage firm failure. The range of coverage provided by SIPC insurance should not be overestimated because it does not protect clients from trading losses or even most types of brokerage fraud. Instead, SIPC replaces missing cash, shares of stock, and other securities in the event of brokerage firm failure. SIPC generally does not provide for protection of commodity futures contracts, investment contracts (such as limited partnerships), and unregistered fixed annuity contracts.  

When the auto company Studebaker Corporation failed in 1963, its pension plan was unable to fulfill its obligations. Senator Jacob Javitz introduced legislation to address failing employee pension and health plans. The eventual result was the  Employee Retirement Security Act of 1974  (ERISA), which makes provisions for preventing pension funds abuse and prohibits imprudent risks taken by fund managers. The Act provided for the use of the  prudent man rule , but left it to the court system to clearly define it. Generally, the prudent man rule holds that a fiduciary is required to invest trust assets as a “prudent man” would invest his own property with the following factors in mind: the needs of beneficiaries, the need to preserve the estate (or corpus of the trust), and the amount and regularity of income. ERISA broadened the scope of this rule without making clear specifications, while holding fund managers personally responsible for “imprudence losses.” In addition, ERISA made provisions for vesting rules and established the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation.  
# Updating Commodities Trading Regulation  

The  Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974  created the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and transferred regulatory authority over futures markets from the Department of Agriculture to the CFTC. The Act also gave the CFTC regulatory authority over non agricultural futures and options on those futures. In 1982, the CFTC provided for the creation of the National Futures Association (NFA), a self-regulatory body for commodities and futures traders.  

# The National Market System  

The brokerage crises were still worrisome to markets and legislators, and a more manageable clearance and settlement system was needed to avoid another paperwork crunch. Furthermore, many legislators were concerned about the fixed commission structure maintained by brokerage firms. As discussed in Chapter 2, The  Securities Acts Amendments of 1975 abolished this long-standing practice of fixed brokerage commissions and called for the establishment of a “national market system” (NMS) where orders would be routed to the best market. This led to efforts to establish a single CLOB (consolidated limit order book) that would list all limit orders and dealer quotes, and resulted in the continuous calculation and dissemination of the NBBO of all listed stocks to all broker-dealers along with the requirement that they pursue best execution (and later, best price) on behalf of their customers.  

The national market system has led to enhanced competition in which brokerage firms, dealers, and markets would compete with each other in a national market intended to be unhindered with unnecessary regulation. In addition, the amendments, implemented on May 1, 1975, sometimes known as “May Day” in securities markets, have led to a national system for clearing and settlement. These amendments have led to the Securities Information Processor (SIP; See Section 3.2), the creation of the consolidated trade system (CTS) and the consolidated quote system (CQS) or more generally, a national market system.  

The national market system expanded competition among trading arenas as we will detail in Sections 5.5 and 5.8. The  Unlisted Trading Privileges Act of 1994  allowed for listed stocks to be traded in any venue, creating distinctions between listing (primary) and trading exchanges for various stocks. A company meeting the requirements of an exchange can have its shares qualify for primary listing on that exchange. After its primary listing, unlisted trading privileges (UTPs) allow the company to then apply to the SEC to have its shares traded on other U.S. exchanges (trading exchanges) as well. Thus, for example, Microsoft, a Nasdaq-listed stock (Nasdaq is Microsoft’s primary exchange), can also trade on the NYSE. UTPs can enhance competitive trading opportunities for such a stock and provide fees to trading exchanges for improving quotes, although UTP does complicate matters for the SIP (see Section 3.2), which must collect and aggregate bid, offer, and sales data from all exchanges and compile the NBBO and quoted spread for each stock.  

# Insider Trading Regulation  

Insider trading violations were infrequently pursued by U.S. authorities until the 1980s, when numerous highly profitable incidents generated significant publicity. But what is insider trading? When is insider trading illegal? First, illegal insider trading is traditionally characterized as the execution of securities transactions on the basis of material nonpublic information, in the U.S., in violation of a fiduciary trust. However, there is no comprehensive statutory definition in the U.S. as to precisely what constitutes impermissible insider trading or even what constitutes an insider. Regulators generally rely on several statutes to enforce prohibitions on insider trading. First, Section 14(e)-3 of the Securities Exchange Act essentially bans trading in securities of a tender offer target by anyone (other than the bidder) on the basis of material, nonpublic information relating to the tender offer. The Act extends to those acting on behalf of either the target or bidder. Insider trading by officers, directors, and direct or indirect beneficial owners of more than   $10\%$   of equity is expressly prohibited in Section 16 of the Act. Section 10(b) of the Act, which prohibits the employment “in connection with the purchase or sale of any security registered on a national securities exchange or any security not so registered, any manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance in contravention of such rules and regulations as the Commission may prescribe as necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the protection of investors.” SEC Rule 10b-5 prohibits “any act, practice, or course of business which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit upon any person, in connection with the purchase or sale of any security.” Together, Section 10(b) and Rule 10b-5 prohibit making false statements or omitting material facts related to the purchase or sale of securities. However, while neither specifically mentions insider trading, broad court interpretations of the word “fraud” in Rule 10b-5 include breach of the personal or fiduciary obligation of an insider to maintain confidentiality, and extends to certain “tippees” of those who fail to fulfill their obligations.  
Subsequent to several insider trading scandals in the early 1980s, Congress passed the Insider Trading Sanctions Act of 1984 , which authorized penalties for illegal insider trading equal to three times the illegally obtained profits plus forfeiture of the profits. However, more scandals followed. The  Insider Trading and Fraud Act of 1988  was intended to help define exactly what constitutes an insider and to increase penalties for illegal insider trading activity. This Act increased the maximum imprisonment from 5 to 10 years, with maximum criminal fines increased from   $\mathbb{\S}100{,}000$   to   $\mathbb{41}\mathrm{,}000\mathrm{,}000$   for individuals and from  $\S500{,}000$   to  $\mathbb{S}2{,}500{,}000$   for non individuals. The Act also initiated a bounty program allowing the SEC to pay rewards to insider trading informants.  

Members of the U.S. Congress were exempt from the provisions of this legislation, which facilitated repeated profitable incidents of congressional insider trading. The 2012 passage of the Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge (STOCK) Act finally attempted to restrict the insider trading activity and “tippee” potential of members of the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government along with their staffs, at least with respect to inside information obtained through the conduct of their official duties. Nevertheless, as we will discuss later, violations and potential violations have continued to occur.  

# Supreme Court Interpretations  

Several U.S. Supreme Court and other federal court cases have also played key roles in determining what constitutes illegal insider activity. An early example was the 1909 case of  Strong v .  Repide , introduced above in Section 5.2, in which the Supreme Court established that under certain special circumstances, a company official must reveal his identity and nonpublic information when he trades with shareholders.  
The 1980 Supreme Court decision in  Chiarella v .  United States  narrowed the definition of a corporate insider to be one who maintains a relationship of trust and confidence with shareholders. This definition has been broadly interpreted by the SEC. For example, the SEC pursued a case against the analyst Raymond Dirks who tipped some of his firm’s clients about a fraud that he uncovered involving an insurance company, which enabled his clients to secure trading profits on the basis of material non-public information. However, Dirks did not breach his relationship of trust and confidence with his clients; his tippers, who had directed him to an ongoing fraud in a whistle-blowing action, had not breached their fiduciary duty, as they had asked Dirks to take the information public, which he ultimately did. In its 1983 decision of  Dirks v .  SEC , the Supreme Court held that insiders violate the law when they knowingly act as tippers while receiving personal benefit from the tippee, which Dirks had not (See  Macey, 2017 ).  

Todd Newman, a trader at the hedge fund Diamondback Capital, had made  $\S72$   million trading Dell stock based on earnings information provided by a tippie who obtained it from a casual friend, who was a Dell insider. Thus, Newman was a “downstream” tippie. In its 2014 decision of  United States v Newman , the Supreme Court narrowed further its Dirks decision along two dimensions. First, the personal benefit received by the tipper must be consequential, not merely reputation al, “career advice” or enhancement of a friendship. Second, the tippie must be aware of this personal benefit. This limits the ability of the government to pursue downstream tippies such as Newman. Essentially, the Supreme Court determined that tippers who knowingly received consequential personal benefit from their tips broke the law, while those who received no benefit did not. In its 2016 decision of  United States v Salmon , the Supreme Court extended the personal benefit to include gifts of inside information to personal friends and relatives, which had been noted earlier in the 1983 Dirks decision.  

A primary difference between the E.U. 1989 insider trading directive (updated and strengthened by the Market Abuse Regulation) and U.S. insider trading law is that in the E.U., tippees receiving inside information from tippers who cannot trade are also prohibited from trading. In the U.S., the  Dirks  case established a personal benefit test. After Newman, the tipper is sanctioned when she receives a consequential personal benefit, and when this personal benefit is known to the tippee. In effect, the E.U. prohibits trading on the basis of inside information by anyone who knows or ought to have known that the basis of trading was inside information. Unlike in the U.S., E.U. securities regulators can pursue insider trading sanctions regardless of whether there was a violation of a fiduciary duty or obligation.  

Presumably indicative of motive, this “personal benefit test” imposed by the U.S. Supreme Court has created difficulties for the SEC. Seeking to “level the playing field” and maintain the integrity of markets, the SEC has historically viewed exploiting informational advantages via inside trading as being harmful to market integrity (“fairness” approach). However, the Supreme Court’s rulings suggest that it views all informationbased trading as reflecting informational advantages, and seeks instead to limit illegality of insider trading to breaches of fiduciary trust and confidence against firms (“property rights” or “misappropriation” approach). That is, if inside information is property that belongs to shareholders, insiders cannot misappropriate this information and legally trade on this inside information.  
# 5.5 DEREGULATION, CORPORATE SCANDALS,AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 2008  

After over 40 years of increasingly burdensome regulation in the financial services industries, President Ronald Reagan sought to reduce this regulatory burden, most notably in the banking industries. A near-collapse of the savings and loans industry shortly followed. Wendy Gramm (spouse of Senator Phil Gramm, an important proponent of deregulation), as chair of the CFTC, in 1989 and 1993 exempted a number of swaps and derivative instruments from regulation. These exemptions were broadened in 2000 by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. The Federal Reserve Board reinterpreted the Glass-Steagall Act several times during the 1980s and 1990s so as to ultimately permit bank holding companies to earn up to a quarter of their revenues from investment banking activities.  

# Deregulation  

The  Financial Modernization Act of 1999 , also known as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, contributed to the consolidation of the financial services industries, allowing for the formation of “mega-banks.” This act formally permitted commercial banks, investment banks, and insurance companies to consolidate, repealing the most important provisions of the GlassSteagall Act passed in the 1930s to separate commercial banking from underwriting and other financial activities. While many combinations had already occurred before passage of the Act (usually through subsidiaries), their legality was questionable. The pending combination of Citigroup (commercial banking) and Travelers (insurance, investment banking, and stock brokerage) into the world’s largest financial institution accelerated and contributed to passage of this Act. Mergers that would have been impossible prior to its passage have masked severe operating and financial difficulties, simply forestalling some inevitable failures. But more importantly, this Act was not replaced with or accompanied by significant regulatory oversight.  

The Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000  exempted most OTC non agricultural derivatives and transactions between “sophisticated parties” from regulation under the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) or as “securities” under other federal securities laws. This act excluded most OTC energy trades from CFTC oversight and financial derivatives from SEC and CFTC oversight. These exemptions formed the so-called “Enron loophole” that contributed to massive fraud and the failure of the Enron company in addition to the role that credit default swaps would play in the 2008 financial crisis.   In part, the Act was intended to resolve disputes between the SEC and CFTC concerning overlapping jurisdictions, particularly with respect to certain types of contracts including  single equity futures  (futures contracts on shares of a single firm’s stock). The Act led to retail trading of these contracts in 2003.  
# Sarbanes-Oxley  

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002  (SOX) was enacted after a wave of corporate scandals (including Enron, WorldCom, and Global Crossing) in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act, also known as the  Corporate and Criminal Fraud Accountability Act , was passed to provide for accounting reform, improved financial reporting, reduced conflicts of interest, and increased penalties for securities fraud. The Act contained 11 sections. Among the highlights of this Act are:  

•  the creation of a five-member  Public Company Accounting Oversight Board  (PCAOB) to oversee public auditing firm practices (Section I)

 •  the requirement for CEOs and CFOs to personally certify the accuracy of their firms’ periodic reports

 •  restricting public accounting firms from providing non auditing services contemporaneously with auditing services to prevent certain conflicts of interest (Section II)

 •  limiting company loans to directors and officers (Subsection 402)

 •  prohibitions of share trading by officers and directors during certain “blackout” periods

 •  the requirement that attorneys representing reporting companies report material violations of law or breaches of contracts to appropriate corporate authorities

 •  Subsection 404 of the Act, which requires that companies prepare assessments of their internal controlling practices along with auditors’ reports on those assessments

 •  requirement that firms to disclose material off-balance sheet transactions and relationships

 •  prohibitions on unfair allocations of securities in the initial public offering (IPO) process

 •  prohibitions on misleading research reports issued by financial advisors and advisory services

 •  requirements for publicly traded firms to have independent directors with financial expertise serve on their audit committees  

# Post-SOX  

Another crucial de regulatory action occurred in 2004 when the SEC relaxed the “net capital rule” (Rule 15c3-1) for the five largest investment banks. This enabled the largest investment banks to substantially increase their debt, both increasing their risk of failure and enabling them to invest more heavily in riskier assets. The rule was originally imposed in 1975 (updated from 1934), requiring that brokers and dealers doing business with the public value all of their tradable assets at market prices, discounting them to account for their market risk. In many respects, relaxation of this Act was consistent with the spirit with the Basel II Accord. Riskier assets were to be discounted more deeply than safer assets. The rule requires broker dealers to limit their debt-to-net capital ratios to 12:1. Broker dealers qualifying for exemptions under this 2004 relaxation were to be designated as “consolidated supervised entities” (CSEs). Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch, Lehman Brothers, and Bear Stearns qualified as CSEs, enabling them to maintain debt-to-equity ratios exceeding 30:1. Four of these five firms failed or were bailed out between 2007 and 2009.  
The Securities Acts Amendments of 1975 led to creation of the National Market System (see Section 5.4). The Unlisted Trading Privileges Act of 1994 allowed for stocks listed on any exchange and certain OTC stocks to be traded in any venue. Thus, for example, Unlisted Trading Privileges allows companies that conduct an IPO and list on the NYSE to have their stock traded in other venues such as Nasdaq, Citadel, and Bats. Regulation NMS, which followed up on these legislative actions was adopted by the SEC in 2005. Reg NMS was intended to modernize the regulatory structure of U.S. equity markets, reflecting the accelerating pace of change in markets due to improved technology and the increased variety of types of market centers (exchanges, crossing networks, ECNs, dark pools, etc.). The key and most controversial provision of this regulation is the Order Protection Rule (Rule 611, also known as the “trade-through” rule). This rule requires that exchanges, alternative trading systems, and OTC market makers maintain and enforce policies to ensure the execution of trades at their best prices (no worse than the NBBO), and encourages traders to post aggressive limit orders, knowing that their quotes will not be bypassed for worse quotes. Regulation NMS was intended to enhance client order protection and to improve client transaction executions by facilitating inter market access. The regulation sought to reduce spreads by allowing for subpenny pricing for sub $\cdot\S1$   shares and to improve public access to market data. Finally, Rule 610(c) of Reg NMS caps fees for access to quotations to  $\S0.003\$   per share. In effect, this fee is a liquidity-taker fee applying when a market order is executed against the limit order associated with the quote.  

The Credit Rating Agency Reform Act of 2006  was enacted to establish guidelines for nationally recognized statistical ratings organization (NRSRO) qualification, to improve regulatory oversight in the ratings industry and to reduce certain conflicts of interest and industry abuses. Prior to enactment of this   $\operatorname{Act},$   only Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s Investors Service, Fitch Ratings (which, together controlled   $95\%$   of the market), and A.M. Best and Dominion (now, DBRS) were recognized as NRSROs. The Act sought to curb the practice of sending a company unsolicited ratings along with a bill. The Act prohibited packaging ratings with the purchase of consulting and other services. For example, the credit rating agencies had been taking fees for rating derivative instruments such as mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) after having received payments from their issuers for helping to package them. Thus, agencies would advise on structuring packages, and then rate the packages that they helped structure so as to receive their highest credit ratings. The Act was intended to limit conflicts of interest that arose when MBSs, CDOs, and other securities are packaged and rated by major rating agencies. In addition, the Act required credit rating agencies to maintain policies and procedures to be in place to manage these types of conflicts when they arose.  

# The 2008 Financial Crisis  

In the summer of 2007, there were increasing reports of troubled mortgages and weakening of the se curit i zed assets and portfolios that contained them. These reports followed on the peak of U.S. housing prices. By the end of the year, Country wide Financial Corporation, one of the largest banks in the United States, was seeking shelter and Northern Rock in the UK was on the brink of failure. The financial system took a significant blow in March 2008 when Bear Stearns, one of the largest investment banks in the United States, collapsed, to be rescued by JP Morgan Chase with backing from the Federal Reserve. The special lending facilities of the Federal Reserve opened the discount window to investment banks to prevent an industry-wide collapse. IndyMac Bank FSB, another major depository institution, failed in July 2008. However, the crisis moved into full swing in September 2008 when Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae were placed under U.S. government conservator ship, Lehman Brothers filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, and the United States entered its worst recession since the Great Depression.  
The contribution of trading activities to the 2008 financial crisis continues to be debated, as we discuss in the next section. Clearly, many institutions with the most substantial trading activities were among those that failed or required bail-outs. However, many of their problems might have been less a result of trading and more a result of excessive origination of toxic instruments, excess leverage, and poor regulatory oversight.  

# 5.6 DODD  FRANK  

Perhaps the most significant piece of securities legislation passed since the 1930s was the  Dodd  Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act  of 2010. Responding to the financial crisis of 2007  2009, Congress passed major reform covering and extending beyond securities markets intended to:  

promote the financial stability of the United States by improving accountability and transparency in the financial system, to end “too big to fail,” to protect the American taxpayer by ending bailouts, [and] to protect consumers from abusive financial services practices.  

This 848-page act was intended to promote financial stability and consumer protection, and extended well beyond securities trading. Among the important reforms affecting traders are:  

•  Providing for the establishment of the  Financial Stability Oversight Council  (FSOC) to supervise systemic risk, promote market discipline, and respond to threats to financial stability. The Council is chaired by the U.S. Treasury Secretary and is comprised of 10 voting members and 5 nonvoting members.

 •  Providing new rules for transparency, independence, and accountability for credit rating agencies, and creation of the Office of Credit Ratings.

 •  Providing for the so-called  Volcker Rule , regulating and limiting banks, their affiliates, and nonbank financial institutions supervised by the Fed with respect to proprietary trading and investment in and sponsorship of hedge funds and private equity funds.  
•  Authorizing the Federal Reserve Board or FSOC to designate clearing agents as systemic ally important and to oversee their activities.

 •  Providing for regulatory authority over swap agreements between the SEC (securitybased swaps) and the CFTC (all other swaps).

 •  Rather than mandate that all swap contracts be traded on exchanges, Dodd  Frank provided for the creation of a swap execution facility (SEF), specifically designed to provide for trade transparency, encourage competitive execution, and ensure a complete record and audit trail of trades, all designed to enhance swaps markets.

 •  Requiring companies selling credit and mortgage-backed products to retain at least   $5\%$  of the instruments’ credit risk unless the underlying loans meet certain standards that reduce risk.

 •  Prohibiting disruptive trading practices, specifically banning spoofing by name in futures and other derivatives markets (See Section 12.4 of this text).  

The Volcker Rule (so-named because of its chief proponent, Paul Volcker, former Chair of the Federal Reserve) component of Dodd  Frank restricts proprietary trading by commercial banks, with certain exceptions. The rule’s primary justifications are that proprietary trading is inherently speculative and exploits essential protections and supports granted by the government to banks, including deposit insurance, routine access to Fed credit, and emergency support (See  Volcker, 2012 ). Stability in the commercial banking system merits such support because of banking’s essential roles in the overall economy including its centrality to the payments system, extension of credit, and safe-keeping of liquid assets. Proprietary trading provides little direct support for any of these key banking functions. Furthermore, proprietary trading distracts banks from performing their core functions, deposit-taking and relationship lending. Critics of the Rule object that it is complicated and costly, adversely affects the competitiveness of U.S. banks, imperils liquidity in financial markets and that proprietary trading is neither a significant contributor to overall bank revenues or significant bank risk factor. We further discuss these and other costs in Section 5.8. Proprietary trading’s role in the 2008 financial crisis is still being debated, though most observers agree that its role was not central, including Volcker himself ( Whitehead, 2011 ). Instead, most observers attribute more blame for the crisis to credit (e.g., mortgages) and liquidity risk (e.g., repos) rather than to market risk and proprietary trading, though proprietary trading was by no means entirely blameless. Implementation of the Volcker Rule was delayed until July 21, 2015, and several extensions were granted to banks to exit their illiquid investments. By June 2017, the Volcker Rule was under siege as legislators and the president sought to roll back regulations. Alternatives to the Rule at the time included increasing equity capital ratios for banks that engaged in proprietary trading. Nevertheless, many of the larger U.S. banks had already sold or closed proprietary trading desks as early as the end of 2011.  

# Post Dodd  Frank: The JOBS Act  

As lawmakers attempted to hasten improvement of the U.S. economy following the recession, regulatory progress after Dodd  Frank included efforts intended to reduce the substantial costs on raising capital. For example, President Obama signed into law the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act in 2012. The JOBS Act was intended to facilitate the so-called emerging-growth companies (capitalizations less than   $\S1$   billion) by creating a “mini-registration” process, and allowing for crowd funding offerings (less than  $\S1$   million) with eased reporting requirements. The SEC followed with amendments to Rule 506 of Regulation D and Rule 144A, to permit small investors to participate in such “unregistered offerings” along with the previously allowed accredited investors (investors with income levels exceeding  $\mathbb{\S200,000}$   or net wealth exceeding  $\mathbb{S}1\mathrm{,}000\mathrm{,}000$   or who hold certain professional securities certifications) and qualified institutional buyers. Such investments by non accredited investors would be limited to the smaller of   $\S2000$   or  $5\%$   of annual income or net worth.  
# 5.7 GOVERNMENT OVERSIGHT OF SELF-REGULATION  

The U.S. securities regulatory system might be characterized as a shared, cooperative coordination of industry, state, and federal systems that serve as complementary components under the authority of the U.S. federal government. However, the extent to which these systems share authority and are coordinated might be subject to some debate. Nevertheless, all these systems do play a role in the regulation of securities markets, and the U.S. government can be regarded as the “senior partner.”  

As discussed previously, 1930s securities legislation provided for some degree of selfregulation in securities markets. While FINRA, exchanges and other markets, and selfregulatory organizations (SROs) themselves still play a primary role in regulating and monitoring market participants, the SEC and other government agencies retain ultimate regulatory powers and frequently play oversight and technical roles in regulatory activity, and seek to “cover gaps” in self-regulation. SROs such as the NYSE have regularly pursued actions against insider trading. If markets fail to properly monitor and regulate themselves, the SEC or CFTC can take action, as might state authorities.  

One important example of SRO failure and SEC oversight was the 1990s Nasdaq so-called “odd-eighths” scandal. Nasdaq market makers declined to post customer quotes in odd-numbered eighths, intentionally widening spreads by using round dollar amounts,  $1/4,\,1/2,$   and 3/4 fractional amounts ( Christie & Schultz, 1994 ). This, of course, impaired liquidity, increased spreads and brokerage commissions along with dealer trading profits. Over 30 securities firms and individuals settled with the SEC by paying   $\S27$   million in fines and incurring other penalties, and agreed to pay an additional   $\S1.03\$   billion in a federal class action suit for price-fixing. Furthermore, in 1997, Nasdaq agreed to implement a series of revised Order Handling Rules, with three essential components. First, the Limit Order Display Rule requires that sizes and prices of customer limit orders be displayed in the NBBO when they were better than market maker quotes. Second, the Quote Rule requires market makers to publicly display their best quotes, further requiring them to display and honor quotes from ECNs. Third, the Actual Size Rule reduced the minimum displayed quote size from 1000 to 100 shares.  

In an earlier example of SRO failure, Richard Whitney, the president of the New York Stock Exchange, was discovered in 1937 to have misappropriated large sums from the NYSE “widows and orphans” fund to save his own brokerage firm. After this scandal, the SEC required that the NYSE to reorganize itself and strengthen the independence of its board of directors.  
Competition among regulatory agencies can enhance the detection of unethical and illegal behavior. In some eras, the SEC has been considered to have been either lax or weak in its enforcement. In certain instances where the SEC has failed to detect market abuses or take corrective action, other regulatory authorities such as state attorneys general have done so. State “blue-sky” laws such as New York State’s Martin Law, as we discussed earlier in Section 5.1, have been used by state attorneys general to pursue abuses. In 2016, the U.S. Department of Labor issued regulations requiring brokers paid to provide investment guidance for certain retirement investment accounts to act solely in the best interest of their clients. These regulations have been hotly contested. Other economies employ multiple regulatory agencies as well. For example, securities regulation in the Europe is administered by E.U. and member country government authorities as well as by self-regulatory organizations (SROs) such as securities exchanges.  

In addition to contributing to detection efforts, regulatory competition also has the potential to contribute to product and process innovation in financial markets as firms seek their preferred regulatory regimes ( Romano, 2001 ). However, overlapping regulatory regimes can also cause difficulties such as costly duplication in regulatory filings and regulatory “double dipping” on fines. For example, both the SEC and FINRA extracted  $\S2.5$   million settlements from Scottrade in 2014/15 over data integrity issues.  

# The Securities and Exchange Commission  

The SEC was created as an independent agency by the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 to protect investors, to maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets, and to facilitate capital formation, particularly in the business sectors. The SEC seeks to ensure that firms and organizations raising money by selling securities to investors disclose certain essential facts about these securities prior to their sale and while they are held. The SEC also seeks to ensure that those who trade securities are dealt with fairly and honestly.  

The president of the United States, with advice and consent from the Senate, appoints the five members of the SEC, including its chair, to staggered five-year terms. No more than three can belong to any one political party. The Commission is comprised of five divisions and 16 offices, with headquarters in Washington, DC, and in 11 regional offices around the country. The Commission interprets and enforces federal securities laws, and issues and amends rules to complement, implement, and support federal legislation. In addition, the SEC monitors and sanctions securities markets (including firms, brokers, advisors, SROs, auditors, and rating agencies), oversees their inspection, and coordinates activities with state and foreign regulators.  

The SEC not only investigates regulatory infractions and enforces legislation, but is an essential rule maker itself. For example, despite legislative and SEC efforts to limit trading on the basis of nonpublic information, many investors still openly did so. For example, it had been common practice for firms to assemble select securities analysts to make corporate announcements to them ahead of announcements to the general public. This type of activity certainly tilted the playing field in the favor of these analysts and their employers.  
In response, the SEC introduced  Regulation Fair Disclosure  (FD) in 2000, which was intended to limit this type of selective disclosure. Regulation FD requires companies to make material information public to all investors. Furthermore, if material information were to leak unintentionally, firms are required to reveal the leaked information to all investors within 24 hours.  

# Enforcement of Securities Regulation  

As discussed above, the SEC develops, administers, and enforces securities regulation in the U.S. The Division of Enforcement of the SEC administers the SEC’s Enforcement Program, which detects and investigates potential violations of federal securities laws and regulations. Investigations might initiate as either informal, which normally involves voluntary production of documents and interviews, or formal, in which case the Division obtains subpoenas for testimony and document production.  

SEC administrative courts are administrative units of the SEC. As such, they do not decide criminal actions, but, as described above, do impose civil and administrative penalties. The Department of Justice pursues both civil and criminal actions through United States Attorneys appointed by the President of the U.S., one for each of 94 federal judicial districts, and their assistant U.S. attorneys. The U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York, which includes New York City and nearby counties on the mainland of New York state, prosecutes criminal and civil cases involving violations of federal securities laws in its district. Because of its location, the office has pursued many of the most high-profile securities cases in the U.S., and has a particularly strong reputation for pursuing securities crime.  

The SEC and other enforcement agencies obtain information on potential securities violations through a variety of leads, including investor tips, media coverage, market surveillance, analysis of security price histories, referrals from other law enforcement agencies and class action attorneys, etc. The stages of the typical SEC investigation are as follows:  

•  Leads , described in the paragraph above, trigger the investigation.

 •  Matter Under Inquiry  (MUI), which is an informal or preliminary investigation to determine whether a formal investigation is warranted and which might consist of as little as a single telephone call and might be closed with no further action taken. MUIs are often accompanied by requests for documents and notices that the individual and/ or institution must take steps to preserve all information that might be relevant to the SEC’s inquiry.

 •  Formal investigation , during which the SEC enforcement staff will prepare and issue a Formal Order of Investigation ; review books, records, and trading data; collect witness testimony; review other pertinent information; and seek orders from federal courts enforcing subpoena requirements when appropriate.

 •  Wells Process , which begins once the SEC believes that a violation of the federal securities laws has occurred and determines that it will seek charges. The target of the investigation is delivered a Wells Notice (described below), which is a notification of the SEC’s intent to recommend that enforcement proceedings be commenced, potentially followed by the target’s Wells Submission responding to the Commission.  
•  Enforcement Actions : After the Wells Process, during which time approximately  $20\%$   of investigations are dropped, the SEC may bring a civil case against the target in federal district court. Because the SEC does not have authority to prosecute criminal cases, the SEC refers them to the U.S. Department of Justice or, in fewer cases, to state criminal authorities. The SEC can bring its own civil enforcement actions to federal district court and/or to administrative proceedings.  

Early in an investigation process, the SEC is likely to informally approach a target or witness for an informal interrogation. To the extent possible, the Division of Enforcement ascertains facts through interrogations of investigation targets, interviewing witnesses, reviewing telephone and other communications records, reviewing financial records and trading data, etc. When appropriate, the Division of Enforcement (or FINRA) normally delivers to the subject of an investigation a  Wells Notice , a notification of its intent to recommend, based on its investigation, that enforcement proceedings be commenced. The Wells Notice (named for John Wells, chair of a 1972 committee formed to review the Commission’s enforcement) briefly summarizes the violation that the Division of Enforcement is investigating or has investigated. The respondent is allowed to respond to the Wells Notice through a Wells Submission to the Commission. After its investigation, the Division of Enforcement presents its findings to the Commission for review, after which, the Commission can authorize filing an administrative action and/or filing a complaint in a federal district court, or drop the matter altogether.  

After investigation by its Division of Enforcement, should the SEC decide to further pursue the matter, it will choose whether to:  

1.  File an administrative action before an SEC administrative judge presiding over an SEC administrative court. Such an administrative enforcement can lead to enjoining an individual and/or firm from further violations, disgorge ment of illegal profits, cease and desist orders, barring or suspending individuals and firms from the securities business, and imposing civil penalties, and/or

 2.  Recommend civil action and/or criminal prosecution to the Securities and Financial Fraud Unit of the Department of Justice, which prosecutes securities, commodities, and other financial fraud cases, including market manipulation and insider trading. Such actions are pursued through federal district courts.  

We discussed earlier in this chapter the roles of the Attorney General for New York State in pursuing violations of New York securities laws, both as civil and criminal procedures. The New York County District Attorney’s Office (district attorney for Manhattan) has somewhat analogous powers as the local authority enforcing state financial crime statutes. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, discussed below, enforces its regulations in a manner similar to that of the SEC.  

# The Commodity Futures Trading Commission  

The CFTC was created as an independent agency in 1974 after the enactment of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act to regulate U.S. commodity futures and option markets. Its creation was delayed in comparison to that of the SEC because most futures and options trading were related to agricultural commodities and thus were overseen by the Department of Agriculture. A number of market developments, including the 1973 opening of the Chicago Options Exchange, led to the 1974 enactment of the Commodities Futures Trading Commission Act.  
In a manner similar to the SEC, the CFTC has five commissioners including its chair appointed by the president to staggered five-year terms, with no more than three commissioners from any one political party. Its mission is to protect market participants and the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices related to futures and options, and to foster open, competitive, and financially sound markets. The CFTC maintains a number 9 of essential offices and divisions, including the following :  

•  The CFTC Office of the General Counsel is the Commission’s legal advisor, represents the Commission in appellate litigation and certain trial-level cases, including bankruptcy proceedings involving futures industry professionals, and advises the Commission on the application and interpretation of the Commodity Exchange Act and other administrative statutes.

 •  The Office of the Executive Director formulates and implements the management and administrative functions of the CFTC and the agency’s budget.

 •  The Division of Clearing and Risk oversees derivatives clearing organizations (DCOs), the clearing of swaps, futures, and options on futures, and market participants that may pose risk to the clearing process.

 •  The Division of Market Oversight is responsible for fostering markets that accurately reflect the forces of supply and demand for the underlying commodity and are free of abusive trading activity, oversees trade execution facilities, and performs market surveillance, market compliance, and market and product review functions.

 •  The Division of Enforcement investigates and prosecutes alleged violations of the Commodity Exchange Act and Commission regulations. Violations may involve commodity futures or option trading on U.S. futures exchanges or the improper marketing and sales of commodity futures products to the general public.

 •  The Office of the Chief Economist provides economic support and advice to the Commission, conducts research on policy issues facing the agency, and provides education and training for Commission staff.  

# 5.8 IMPACT OF REGULATORY ACTIVITY  

Successful financial regulation can prevent market failure, promote macroeconomic stability, protect investors, and mitigate the effects of financial failures on the real economy. Financial regulation can also be used to improve market transparency. However, financial regulation also imposes a variety of costs on regulated firms and the economy:  

•  Direct costs: Costs of regulation administration and enforcement, which might be complicated by having multiple agencies enforce regulation. These costs might be financed by some combination of taxes and fees imposed on regulated institutions and their clients as well as taxes imposed on the general public. These costs might also be absorbed by regulated firms through self-regulation.  
•  Indirect costs: Costs of compliance, such as those associated with maintaining records, hiring compliance officers, making payments to auditors and ratings agencies, and so on.

 •  Distortions to financial markets: Reactions to regulation often cause institutions to conduct business sub-optimally, and can cause firms to leave or restrict their entry into the marketplace. Regulated firms often seek operating jurisdictions with the least restrictive regulations.  

These costs hurt profits of regulated firms, and many are ultimately passed on to the real economy. Even with the financial market crisis of 2007  2009, the U.S. financial regulatory systems are often considered to be among the most highly developed, comprehensive, effective, and mimicked in the world. But these systems are far from perfect, and numerous studies have been conducted to more closely examine the effects of financial regulation.  

Firms often respond to regulatory changes (and tax increases) by seeking more attractive jurisdictions in which to operate. This practice is called  regulatory arbitrage , though it is not really arbitrage under a strict definition. The “race to the bottom” occurs when jurisdictions respond by reducing regulatory (or tax) burdens so as to compete with other jurisdictions to attract business. Hedge funds regularly domicile offshore in order to reduce tax and regulatory burdens. On the other hand, swap dealers and other non exchange market participants often prefer to trade with counter parties whose jurisdictions provide “pro-creditor” protections. Such regulatory protections can enhance markets.  

Macey (2003)  proposes  regulatory globalization  as a means through which regulatory agencies can extend their reach. Regulatory globalization involves cooperation between regulatory agencies in different countries (jurisdictions) through agreements or international regulatory institutions such as the G20, IOSCO (discussed in the next section), or the Bank for International Settlements to agree on regulatory regimes.  

# Sarbanes-Oxley Impact  

Since its enactment in 2002, Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) and its costs and benefits have been a source of controversy ( Coates & Srinivasan, 2014 ). Many observers (see Coates & Srinivasan) argue that the Act did not go far enough in its requirements while many corporate managers argued that the Act imposed unduly expensive reporting and compliance requirements on them. Nonetheless,  Cohen, Dey, and Lys (2008)  found that SOX did lead to a decline in earnings management, and  Gordon, Loeb, Lucyshyn, and Sohail (2006) found that SOX improved the voluntary disclosure of information security activities by firms. Costs of regulation are difficult to measure, and the benefits are usually even more difficult to identify and measure. Based on several extrapolations, Dyck, Morse, and Zingales (2014)  estimated the annual benefits of SOX to equal   $\S208$   billion net of compliance costs. We will further discuss the benefits of regulation and costs of regulatory violations here and in Chapter 13.  
While the benefits and costs associated with SOX continue to be evaluated, U.S. regulatory actions have a number of interesting results, many of which are unintended. First, financial regulatory activity tends to impose significant burdens on business and financial institutions. A  Financial Executives International Survey (2004)  estimated the mean compliance costs to U.S. business of Section 404 of SOX dealing with internal control quality to be   $\S3$   million per firm per year, not counting the distortion costs associated with impacts on company operations. Accounting for the full impact of   $\operatorname{SOX},$  including indirect costs,  Zhang (2007)  estimated through stock market reactions that the total costs imposed on business by SOX compliance would be as high as   $\S1.4$   trillion, though, based on survey data,  Hochberg, Sapienza, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009)  estimated annual compliance costs to be   $\S6.8$   billion per year. While the lower figure is annual, there is still a wide spread between the two cost estimates. Within three years of the enactment of SOX, a number of European companies, including ITV and United Business Media, had de registered their firms’ stock in the United States to avoid these costs. These and other distortions were clearly unintended by the authors of SOX. Vermont Teddy Bear, a Shelbourne, Vermont  based gift and toy company, took its shares private in a highly publicized 2005 act intended to avoid costs of complying with SOX. More generally,  Chh a och hari a and Grinstein (2007)  argue that smaller firms suffer disproportionately from the costs of implementing Sarbanes-Oxley, particularly the costs of maintaining internal controls. In addition, smaller firms experience more difficulty attracting qualified independent directors to their boards. Chh a och hari a and Grinstein found that larger firms that needed to make the most significant adjustments to comply with Sarbanes-Oxley experienced the most significant short-term benefits to their share prices.  

While SOX has been blamed for causing firms to refuse to list or withdraw from listing their shares in the United States, it is important to note that companies were regularly delisted from the NYSE prior to SOX for a variety of reasons. For example, firms either delist or refuse to list their shares because they simply cannot fulfill or continue to fulfill NYSE listing requirements. Some firms that delisted might simply have found it convenient to blame SOX for being forced into exchange delisting.  

Another effect of financial regulation is its encouragement of financial innovation. Numerous financial products and markets owe their creation and/or growth to financial regulation and efforts to bypass regulation. A small sampling of examples includes preferred stock, interest rate swaps, hedge funds, loan se curit iz at ions and swap funds. Another innovation from SOX is markets for unregistered shares. Consider GSTRuE, the Goldman Sachs Tradable Unregistered Equity OTC Program, which was, in part, created to sell shares of Oaktree Capital Management, LLC, an alternative management firm. Oaktree, like other alternative management firms Blackstone and Fortress, prefers to operate under regulatory “radars” and with a significant degree of confidentiality. Blackstone and Fortress, as public firms, are subject to SOX and other regulation applicable to public firms. Goldman Sachs floated shares of Oaktree stock to fewer than 499 institutional investors with capital in excess of   $\S100$   million, and created GSTRuE so that these institutional investors could trade those issued shares outside of the public securities regulatory reach.  
# Impact of Reg NMS  

Reg NMS (See Section 5.5), in particular, the Order Protection Rule requiring executions at the best quote regardless of quote reliability or size, has been controversial since it was proposed. While Reg NMS did seek to improve market competition and automation, and did seek to protect investor orders, the Order Protection Rule component of Reg NMS has led to serious unintended consequences, as was predicted before its passage. Some observers (e.g.,  O’Hara, 2004 ) have noted that Regulation NMS does not account for the diverse needs of different types of traders and has led to a deterioration of liquidity. This deterioration of liquidity has led some traders seeking to bypass better quotes on the NYSE for speedier trades or more anonymous trades in dark markets, further increasing market fragmentation and complexity, thereby increasing market fragmentation. For example, some trades might have executions forced into less reliable or slower markets in order to fulfill the best price requirement while HFT and other traders have learned to game the system brought on by the Order Protection Rule.  Redler (2010)  and  Chung and Chu wong an ant (2010)  argued that Regulation NMS has, contrary to its objectives, increased spreads and trading costs while reducing liquidity and depth in equity markets. In fact, Redler argued that the May 6, 2010 “flash crash was a direct result of false liquidity in the marketplace insulated by the Order Protection Rule,” where HFTs retracted their orders immediately after observing the one-sided market.  

# Dodd  Frank and the Volcker Rule: Impact on Trading  

While much of Dodd  Frank was concerned with banking, stability, and consumer protection, many of its trading components such as the clearing mandate produced somewhat less controversy. A major exception to this was the Volcker Rule, which was largely in effect by mid-2015 as part of Dodd  Frank implementation. In effect, this rule prohibits bank proprietary trading by withdrawing federal assistance (bailout) expectations from banks undertaking risky trading activities, reducing the moral hazard problem (taking risks with the money of others). Hence, many banks spun off or shut down proprietary trading desks. The banking industry expressed much dissatisfaction with the rule because of its negative impact on an important but volatile source of bank profits. In addition, consider the effect of the Volcker Rule on banks’ ability to trade on behalf of clients. For example, banks need to maintain and regularly adjust inventories of currency so as to support and maintain markets for clients who trade currencies. Proprietary trading is important to banks to fulfill this key function on behalf of clients.  

A  2011  study conducted by Oliver Wyman (a consultancy firm) on behalf of the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, a trade group for the securities industry, claimed that the Volcker Rule could cost investors in U.S. corporate bonds as much as   $\S315$   billion, due to reductions in liquidity, increases in interest rates, and other distortions caused by the rule. However, many of these losses by banks are likely to be recaptured by other investors and institutions that fill affected banks’ proprietary trading roles. In addition, some of these lost profits will be compensated by investors who receive higher interest payments.  
The  Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act of 2018  was a modest follow-up to Dodd-Frank, intended to provide for regulatory relief, particularly for small banks, and to provide for certain consumer disclosure requirements. The Act redefined the “too-big-to-fail” cut-off for banks at   $\S250$   billion (up from   $\S50$   billion), reduced the number of systemic ally important banks from 38 to 12, and subjected only larger banks  $(>100$   billion in assets) to stress testing requirements. It also eliminated the Volcker Rule for banks with less than  $\S10$   billion in assets, provided that their trading assets and trading  $5\%$  liabilities are less than  of total assets.  

Implementation of the Volcker Rule proved controversial and remains so. The Fed, FDIC, OCC, SEC, and CFTC finalized regulations for implementation of revised versions of the Volcker Rule in 2020-21. The version of the rule now to be followed by banks is customized, depending on the size of the bank, the bank’s level of traded assets, the bank’s rationale for trading, and the types of assets that the bank trades.  

# 5.9 REGULATION: THE INTERNATIONAL ARENA  

Almost 30 years ago, Benn Steil offered the following transaction description to illustrate the increasing globalization of securities markets:  

An American broker in London buys German “Bunds” for a Mexican client from a Japanese trading house in Paris and clears the trade in Brussels. This sort of story line is not simply plausible, but is on the verge of becoming commonplace ( Steil, 1994 , p. 197).  

However, most securities market regulation (other than certain instances in the European Union) is conducted at the national level, or in some cases, including Canada, even at the provincial level. Regulatory activity on the global level has been more pervasive in the banking industries than in the securities industries.  

# IOSCO  

The most significant nonbanking global organization engaged in regulatory policy is the International Organization of Securities Commissions  (IOSCO). This organization cooperates in “developing, implementing and promoting adherence to internationally recognized and consistent standards of regulation, oversight and enforcement in order to protect investors, 10 maintain fair, efficient and transparent markets, and seek to address systemic risks.” Thus, the organization seeks to improve financial efficiency and transparency, protect investors, and reduce systemic risks. The Organization is comprised of representatives from over 100 national securities regulatory commissions around the world.  

# Basel  

Because of significant overlaps between the banking and securities industries, the  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision  is also a crucial global body providing for regular cooperation on securities regulation. Neither of these organizations has formal regulatory authority in any country, although their policy recommendations are regularly adopted by countries. While the Basel Committee is primarily concerned with bank safety, financial trading does impact bank risk, and Basel directives can affect trading. For example, consider the Basel III directive to vary capital requirements as trading activities impact bank risk. This directive will impact bank trading activities, and banks will incur costs to comply with the requirements.  
# ESMA  

At a more regional level, the  European Securities and Markets Authority  (ESMA) is the European Supervisory Authorities (ESA) body that regulates EU securities markets. Unlike the IOSCO, the ESMA is the only supranational securities regulatory body that has the authority to draft legally binding technical standards and ban securities market activities likely to increase systemic risks, and has the ability to launch fast-track country-specific procedures to ensure consistent application of EU law. The ESMA can initiate investigations and request that EU member countries launch investigations, and can impose fines and issue recommendations based on the results of those investigations. The ESMA also has binding mediation powers to resolve securities market conflicts among member countries.  

# MiFID  

The  Markets in Financial Instruments Directive  (MiFID) was approved in 2004 and took effect in 2007 as the cornerstone of the E.U.’s regulation of financial instruments and markets. It was intended to create a single market based on competing trading venues. In some respects, MiFID is analogous to the National Market System in the U.S. (The Securities Acts Amendments of 1975, discussed in Section 5.4). MiFID provides for standardized rules on the issue of securities, transparency and reporting requirements, prevention of market abuse, client order handling (including best execution), and conduct of securities firms. In order to provide for client protection rights, MiFID categorizes securities firms’ clients as follows:  

•  Retail Clients: Clients not categorized as Professional Clients or Eligible Counter parties

 •  Professional Clients: Other than Eligible Counter parties—“large undertakings” with 2 or 3 of the following: balance sheet totaling at least EUR 20 million, net turnover of at least EUR 40 million or capital of at least EUR 2 million; or has requested and been granted Professional Client status

 •  Eligible Counter parties (ECP): Investment firms, credit institutions, insurance companies, other financial institutions, central banks, and national governments  

These client groups are granted, in descending order, levels of protection, as professional clients and ECPs are considered to be more experienced and sophisticated. Protections concern the delivery of investment advice, investment suitability assessment, and provision of details on fees and commissions received by the securities firm.  
MiFID II and  Markets in Financial Instruments Regulation  (MiFIR) were adopted by the E.U. in 2014 to take effect in 2018. MiFID II seeks to force more trading into regulated trading venues such as exchanges or other eligible platforms. In addition, it enhances rules for algorithmic trading and HFT conduct (e.g., algo testing), provides for non-E.U. firm access to E.U. markets, facilitates small- and medium-sized firms’ access to capital, and increases supervisory powers for regulators. MiFIR, seeking to enhance transparency, sets forth improved reporting requirements for pre- and post-trade data to the general public.  

# Risk Taking, Clawbacks, and Malus  

Most financial institutions face a variety of regulations limiting their risk-taking activities and behavior. Clearinghouses, clearing firms, and brokerage firms, as institutions, make efforts to limit their clients’ risk taking and carefully manage their own institutional risk-taking. However, financial institution employee incentive programs vary widely, as do government regulations designed to limit risk-taking by employees. Whereas securities firms normally reward their traders handsomely for profitable trading, they have not consistently imposed commensurate penalties for unprofitable trading activity. This asymmetry can lead to excess risk-taking on the part of individual traders and impose significant risk of institutional failure (see Chapter 13 for examples).  

Adapting compensation structures can potentially mitigate traders’ motivations to engage in excessive risk-taking. Malus and clawbacks are provisions that can be used in trader compensation packages to limit inappropriate risk-taking. A  clawback  is a compensation provision that allows for already vested or paid employee compensation to be reclaimed by an employer based on financial restatements, reputation al damage, gross negligence or other malfeasance on the part of the employee. Clawback provisions can be exercised in the event of losses that are realized by the firm after compensation has been awarded. A  malus  provision in a compensation contract reduces or withholds pending compensation in the event of an undesirable performance outcome, such as a loss induced by risk-taking. It is often interpreted as the opposite of a bonus, where compensation is maintained in escrow and can be retroactively reduced when it becomes clear that employee performance did not merit the pay.  

Countries differ with respect to the legality of clawback provisions. Most E.U. financial institutions, including those in Germany, Italy, Belgium, and Portugal, are required to implement clawback clauses in their variable remuneration contracts to material risktakers and certain senior managers. Spain requires employees to provide express written consent for such clauses to be enforceable. U.K. financial institutions are required to subject material risk-takers to clawbacks for at least 7 years after payment or vesting, rising to 10 years for certain senior managers. On the other hand, although Section 954 of the Dodd-Frank Act authorized SEC-mandated and exchange-enforced clawback rules, as of mid-2021, the SEC has not implemented proposed rules for such requirements. Nonetheless, many U.S. financial institutions have implemented such rules anyway, in some cases at the urging of large institutional shareholders such as CalPERS and BlackRock. Unfortunately, most of these clawback rules have been mostly applicable to senior managers and few such rules have resulted in actual clawbacks.  
# Selected Country Regulatory Authorities  

The  Federal Financial Supervisory Authority  (BaFin) is the German financial regulatory authority under the supervision of the  Federal Ministry of Finance . BaFin is one of the approximately 30 country-specific regulators belonging to and working with ESMA. BaFin supervises banks, banks, financial services institutions, securities exchanges, insurance firms, pension funds, investment funds, and asset management companies. It also enforces standards of professional conduct in financial institutions.  

The U.K. maintains two primary financial regulators over financial service firms, known as the  Financial Conduct Authority  (FCA) and the  Prudential Regulation Authority  (PRA). Funded by the institutions that it regulates, the FCA seeks to pro actively ensure that consumers are protected in the marketplace and that markets maintain integrity and function well. The FCA is an independent regulator, supervised by the Treasury, which oversees the U.K. financial system. The PRA, an arm of the Bank of England, seeks to pro actively ensure the safety and soundness of financial institutions. Both regulators regulate and supervise commercial banks, securities firms, and insurance companies, and, since 2012, have served to replace the failed Financial Services Authority (FSA).  

Securities markets are regulated in Japan by its  Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission  (SESC), established in 1992 as a commission operating under the authority of the Japanese Financial Services Agency. As is the case with the SEC in the United States, the SESC attempts to ensure that investors receive full disclosure with respect to security issues. Unlike in the United States, the SESC imposes eligibility standards on Japanese firms wishing to make public bond issues. The SESC does not have the authority to prosecute violations. The Commission files its findings and recommendations with prosecutors and the Financial Services Agency.  

Whereas the U.S. abandoned its emphasis on blue skies regulation in the 1930s, Canada relies on provincial securities regulations. Each of Canada’s 10 provinces and three territories has its own securities legislation and its own securities commission. With the exception of Ontario, provinces recognize securities professionals’ registration status under any of the other provincial authorities. This mutual recognition is known as the “passport system.” In addition, these provincial commissions appoint representatives that comprise the Canadian Securities Administrators (CSA), a national organization that supports and monitors the brokerage industry. The CSA and provincial regulatory authorities have conferred self-regulatory organization (SRO) status on the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC), the Chambre de la Se´curite´ Financie\`re (CSF—Quebec only), and the Mutual Funds Dealer Association (MFDA). These SROs have the power to regulate the conduct of securities dealers, including mutual fund dealers, all under the ultimate supervision of the CSA. There has been pressure to create national securities legislation and governmental regulatory bodies, but these efforts are still underway.  

# 5.10 PRIVATIZATION OF REGULATION AND EXCHANGE RULES  

Privatization of regulation typically refers to non government creation and adoption of common guidelines to govern the behavior of participants in the system (markets). The CFA Institute (2007)  stated that “the over arching purpose of any self-regulatory group is to keep industry interests aligned with the public interest so as to avoid government intervention and the possibility of more-restrictive regulation.”  
The Maloney Act of 1938 and the formation of the NASD launched a significant innovation leading towards some degree of privatization in the regulation of securities markets. While governmental organizations still play the dominant role in securities regulation, over time there have been wide variations in levels of privatization. NASD (now merged into FINRA), the National Futures Association, and exchanges themselves act or acted as SROs (self-regulatory organizations). However, their activity is overseen and perhaps even micro managed by the SEC. The OTC (nonpublic) markets rely on trade associations or nonprofit corporations to prepare uniform contracts and standardized agreements among market participants. For example, in 1987 the  International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA), which sets standards for derivative contracts, prepared the then 14-page ISDA Master Agreement that has regulated the huge swaps markets. This relatively short Agreement acts as a standardized contract used among participants in these huge markets, and reflects a principles-based regulatory regime for the regulated markets. ISDA and its early success were instrumental to the refusal by Congress to further regulate derivatives markets in the 1990s. When such efforts fail to prevent market stress or failure, government regulators intervene. Major advantages to maintaining private regulatory bodies or self-regulation in securities markets might be as follows:  

•  Market participants have the most intimate knowledge of the markets to be regulated.

 •  The regulatory foci on developing best practices and effective monitoring and enforcement policies are based on economic and reputation al self-interest.

 •  Governmental regulatory costs are reduced as they are passed on to the regulated market.  

# NYSE Listing Standards  

Exchanges are established to facilitate and regulate trading, and remain important sources of securities markets regulation. Such regulations ensure that all participants remain reliable partners for trading, as well as establish exactly what is to be traded. Exchange rules are intended to ensure that markets remain active and liquid. For example, the NYSE imposes a variety of rules on trading, member firms, and listed firms. While the NYSE considers each application to list company shares for trading on its own merit, its listing standards are considered rather stringent (although standards do vary for NYSE, NYSE American (formerly NYSE MKT), and NYSE ARCA listings). Such standards for NYSE typically include a global market capitalization level (  $\Im{200}$   million in many scenarios as of 2017) and at least 1.1 million outstanding shares with at least 400 shareholders holding a minimum of 100 shares, as well as minimum historical earnings levels and restrictions concerning corporate governance (which, if adopted, will include the proposed SEC clawback requirements that we discussed in the previous section). There are a number of other listing requirements in addition to requirements for delisting a security.  
# NYSE Circuit Breakers and Trading Halts  

Circuit breakers are intended to slow or stop market activity so that traders can digest information and react rationally to market fundamentals. For example, with Rule 80A, the NYSE instituted a system of “circuit breakers” following the stock market crash of 1987. This rule followed the Brady Report recommending circuit breakers as a means to limit credit risk, “level the playing field” for individual investors needing more time to obtain and react to new information, reduce the illusion of perfect liquidity in the face of onesided volume, facilitate price discovery by giving traders additional time for analysis, inhibit panic, and publicize order imbalances. This rule required that sell (buy) orders related to  index arbitrage  in component stocks of the S&P 500 Index could be executed only on an uptick (downtick) or zero tick.   A  $2\%$   movement in the DJIA in a single day triggered the rule. The rule was rescinded in 2007.  

NYSE Rule 7.12 (formerly Rule 80B) provides for more drastic reactions to more dramatic market volatility. Market-wide circuit breaker triggers, mostly unchanged since 2013, are now as follows:  

Level 1:  A  $7\%$   drop in the S&P 500 Index from its previous close: Trading halts on all stocks on all exchanges for 15 minutes unless it occurs after 3:25 PM. Level 2:  A   $13\%$   drop in the S&P 500 Index from its previous close: Trading halts on all stocks on all exchanges for 15 minutes unless it occurs after 3:25 PM. Level 3:  A  $20\%$   drop in the S&P 500 Index from its previous close: Trading halts on all stocks on all exchanges for the remainder of the day.  

Only one Level 1 and one Level 2 halt can occur in a single trading day.  

The highly volatile period caused by selloffs at the start of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic led to 4 market-wide circuit breaker Level 1 closures in March 2020. Afterwards, the “MWCB Task Force,” comprised of members from stock exchanges, the SEC, the CFTC, the CME, and several securities industry members, concluded that the circuit breakers generally functioned and served their roles as intended and recommended no major changes.  

Earlier in 2010, in response to the May 6 “flash crash,” the SEC mandated a uniform single-stock circuit breaker for most of the largest equities irrespective of marketplace, where stocks whose price moves up or down by more than  $5\%$   in a five-minute period are subject to a five-minute (or longer) pause in trading activity. These single-stock circuit breakers for individual National Market System (NMS) securities have evolved into a more elaborate set of “moving” price bands known as the  Limit Up-Limit Down  (LULD) mechanism, which restricts NMS security prices to remain within trading bands. These bands are set by the appropriate SIP (SIAC or UTP) based on the security’s average price over the past 5 minutes and updated by the SIP every 30 seconds. The widths of the bands depend on the stock’s price activity and time of day, normally between   $5\%$   and  $20\%$  . The bands’ widths are based on the average security price over the past 5 minutes, or the daily open early in the day or reopen price after a halt. All executable orders and quotes must fall within the allowable trading bands set for the security. When there are no executable quotes for a given security from any exchange over a 15-second period, the market for that security halts for 5 minutes and the bands are reset based on a reopening auction price obtained by the listing exchange.  
Consider a somewhat simplified numerical example illustrating the Limit Up-Limit Down mechanism. Suppose that   $10\%$   price bands have been set for a given NYSE stock with an average transaction price of   $\S100$   over the past five minutes. For the next 30 seconds, only quotes between   $\S90$   and  $\S110$   are executable for the stock. Now, suppose negative information about the company’s stock is released. If the stock should fail to receive any quote within this   $10\%$   range from any trading venue for 15 seconds, all trading venues must pause trading this stock for 5 minutes. Suppose that the reopening auction conducted at the end of the halt by the NYSE produced a price of  $\S80$   for the stock. Then the trading bands will be re-set for 30 seconds between  $\S72$   and  $\S88$  .  

Despite the MWCB Task Force conclusions described above, the extent to which these circuit breakers have actually benefited the market is not clear. First, traders complain that if market price begins to approach circuit breaker levels, their changes tend to accelerate towards the level needed to trigger the circuit breaker (magnet effect). Second, the extent to which the exchanges coordinate their circuit breaker activity is not clear.  

# Additional Reading  

Kitch (2000)  and  Niemeyer (2001)  are very readable and reasonably short introductions to the regulation of securities markets along with considerations for improving regulation.  Congressional Research Service (2020)  provides an easy to read and slightly more general introduction to financial regulation.  Fleming (2011)  and the first chapter of  Loss and Seligman (2004)  present interesting early histories of securities regulation. Websites for the NYSE, FINRA, CFTC, and SEC all provide substantial details on regulations, including the original documentation. The same is true for most of the international and private securities regulatory bodies. The  Securities and Exchange Commission Historical Society (2016)  has posted a very readable timeline on the history of financial regulation at  http://www. sec historical.org/museum/timeline/1930-timeline.php . The FINRA site for the Series 7 Examination is a good starting point for readers interested in pursuing careers in the securities industry ( http://www.finra.org/Industry/ Compliance/Registration/Qualifications Exams/Registered Reps/P011051 ). SecLaw.com provides an extensive collection of articles on securities regulation, ranging from the very introductory to the minutiae of specific securities and markets.  Ford (2008)  offers a nice discussion of principles-based and rules-based securities regulation.  

# References  

CFA Institute. (2007).  Self-Regulation in today’s securities markets: Outdated system or work in progress?  (Vol. 2007, No. 7). Codes, Standards and Position Papers. CFA Institute Centre For Financial Market Integrity, September. Chh a och hari a, V., & Grinstein, Y. (2007).  Corporate governance and firm value: The impact of the 2002 governance rules . Johnson School Research Paper Series No. 23-06, AFA 2006 Boston Meetings Paper, March. Christie, W. G., & Schultz, P. H. (1994). Why do NASDAQ market makers avoid odd-eighth quotes?.  Journal of Finance ,  49 (5), 1813  1840. Chung, K.H., & Chu wong an ant, C. (2010). Regulation NMS and market quality.  Financial Management . Available at:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-053X.2012.01184.x Coates, J. C., IV, & Srinivasan, S. (2014). SOX after ten years.  Accounting Horizons ,  28 (3), 627  671. Cohen, D., Dey, A., & Lys, T. (2008). Real and accrual-based earnings management in the pre- and post-Sarbanes Oxley periods.  Accounting Review ,  82 (3), 757  787. Congressional Research Service (2020). Who regulates whom? An overview of the U.S. financial regulatory framework. Unpublished CRS report. Available at:  , https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44918 . Accessed 09.09.21.  
Cravath, Swaine and Moore. (2001).  Memorandum for ISDA members: Commodity futures modernization act of 2000 , New York, NY, January 5, 2001. Available at:  , http://www.google.com/url?sa  $=$  t&rct  $=$  j&q  $=$  2(h)%20and%20 (g)%20of%20the%20 commodity%20futures%20 modernization%20act%20of%202000&source  $=$  web&cd  $=$  3&sqi  $=$  2&ved  $\risingdotseq$  0CDMQFjAC&url  $=$  http%3A%2F%2Fwww.isda.org%2Fspeeches%2Fpdf%2 F Analysis of Com mod ity-Exchange-Act-Legislation.pdf&ei  $=$  qiZgT9-t NIr z 0 gG 18 pi yB w&usg  $=$  AF Q jC NF dfR Or 92 VJ Z R fK cF G 2 E vy w 7TKvQ .  Accessed 13.03.12. Dyck, A., Morse, A., Zingales, A. (2014).  How pervasive is corporate fraud?  Working paper. Available at:  , http:// faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/morse/research/papers/Dyck Morse Z in gales Pervasive.pdf .  Accessed 20.09.21. Financial Executives International (FEI). (2004).  Section 404 costs survey .  , https://www.sec.gov/info/smallbus/ acspc/fei.pdf  $\textgreater$   Accessed 13.06.17. Fleming, R. A. (2011). 100 years of securities law: Examining a foundation laid in the Kansas Blue Sky.  Washburn Law Journal ,  50 (3), 583  610. Ford, C. L. (2008). New governance, compliance, and principles-based securities regulation.  American Business Law Journal ,  45 (1), 1  60. Gordon, L. A., Loeb, M. P., Lucyshyn, W., & Sohail, T. (2006). The impact of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on the corporate disclosures of information security activities.  Journal of Accounting and Public Policy ,  25 , 503  530. Hed-Hofmann, T. (1965). The Maloney Act experiment.  Boston College Industrial and Commercial Law Review ,  6 (2), 187  218. Hochberg, Y. L., Sapienza, P., & Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2009). A lobbying approach to evaluating the Sarbanes Oxley Act.  Journal of Accounting Research ,  47 (2), 519  583. Kitch, E. (2000). Regulation of securities markets. In B. Bouckaert, & G. De Geest (Eds.),  Encyclopedia of law and economics .  The regulation of contracts  (Vol. III). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Available at:  , http://encyclo.findlaw. com/5660book.pdf .  Accessed 05.01.12. Langevoort, D. C. (2020). Watching insider trading law wobble: Obus, Newman, Salman, two Martomas, and a Blaszcak.  Fordham Law Review ,  89 , 507  528. Loss, L., & Cowett, E. M. (1958).  Blue sky law . New York: Little, Brown and Company. Loss, L., & Seligman, J. (2004).  Fundamentals of securities regulation  (5th ed.). New York: Aspen Publishers. Macey, J. R. (2003). Regulatory globalization as a response to regulatory competition.  Emory Law Journal ,  52 , 1353  1379. Macey, J. R. (2017). Beyond the personal benefit test: The economics of tipping by insiders.  Journal of Law and Public Affairs ,  2 (2). Mahoney, P. G. (2015).  Wasting a crash: Why securities regulation fails . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Markham, J. W. (2010). The subprime crisis—A test match for the bankers: Glass-Steagall vs. Gramm-LeachBliley.  University of Pennsylvania Journal of Business Law ,  12 (4), 1081  1134. Niemeyer, J. (2001).  An economic analysis of securities market regulation and supervision: where to go after the Lamfalussy report?  SSE/EFI Working Paper Series in Economics and Finance No. 482. Stockholm, Sweden: Economic Research Institute, Stockholm School of Economics. O’Hara, M. (2004). Searching for a new center: U.S. securities markets in transition.  Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review , 37  52. Oliver Wyman, Inc. (2011).  The Volcker rule: Considerations for implementation of proprietary trading regulations . Available at: Unpublished report, http://www.sifma.org/workarea/download asset.aspx?id 5 22888 .  Accessed 04.01.12. Redler, S. (2010).  SEC should rethink reg NMS to fix HFT liquidity problem . MrSwing. Available at:  , http://www. mrswing.com/articles/SEC Should Rethink Reg NM S to Fix H FT Liquidity Pr.html  $>$   Accessed 04.01.12. Romano, R. (2001). The need for competition in international securities regulation.  Theoretical Inquiries in Law ,  2 . Schlesinger, A. M., Jr. (1958).  The coming of the New Deal: 1933  1935, The Age of Roosevelt  (Vol. II). New York: Houghton-Mifflin. Securities and Exchange Commission Historical Society. (2016). Timeline . , http://www.se historical.org/ museum/timeline/1930-timeline.php .  Accessed 06.12.17. Sgambati, B. (2016). Using the Martin Act to bring fraudulent practices in dark pool promotion to light: An analysis of the Martin Act’s applicability to misrepresentations regarding the operation of dark pools.  Columbia Journal of Law   $\mathcal{S}$   Social Problems ,  610. Steil, B. (1994). International securities markets regulation. In B. Steil (Ed.),  International financial market regulation (pp. 197  232). West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons.  
Strong v. Repide. (1909).  Justia US Supreme Court Center—213 U . S .  419 (1909) . Supreme.justia.com  , http:// supreme.justia.com/us/213/419/  $\textgreater$   Accessed 20.08.12. Volcker, P. (2012).  Commentary on the restrictions on proprietary trading by insured depositary institutions  , http:// online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/Vol cker Rule Essay 2-13-12.pdf .  Accessed 06.09.17. Whitehead, C. K. (2011). The Volcker rule and evolving financial markets.  Harvard Business Law Review ,  1 , 39  73. Zhang, I. X. (2007). Economic consequences of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002.  Journal of Accounting and Economics ,  44 (1  2), 74  115.  

# 5.11 EXERCISES  

1. a.  Some lawyers and economists have argued that legalizing insider trading would benefit markets by allowing insiders to disseminate information through their own trading activity. Prepare an argument to support this position. b.  Some observers argue that the SEC’s efforts to “level the playing field” by limiting insider trading could, in the extreme, ultimately undermine incentives to perform important securities research needed to support market efficiency, further impeding society’s efficient allocation of resources. Prepare an argument to support this position.  

2.  The following was taken from the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Section 10, amended as of January 3, 2012:  

It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, by the use of any means or instrumentality of interstate commerce or of the mails, or of any facility of any national securities exchange . . . . To use or employ, in connection with the purchase or sale of any security registered on a national securities exchange or any security not so registered, or any securities-based swap agreement, any manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance in contravention of such rules and regulations as the Commission may prescribe as necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the protection of investors.  

This rule has been used as a basis to prosecute insider trading activity. Describe how regulator reliance on this rule might characterize an example of “principles-based” regulation in the United States.  

3. a.  Insider trading law has been described as a field largely belonging in the arena of common law rather than arising from statutes (e.g.,  Langevoort 2020 ). Why might insider trading in some respects be said to belong in the arena of common law? b.  Describe how the SEC and the Supreme Court of the United States approaches to the legality (or illegality) of insider trading differ.  

4.  In response to the Financial Crisis of 2007-09, Congress passed major financial system regulatory reforms known as the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010. What were the primary intentions and provisions of this important legislation?  

5.  How is the Volcker Rule related to the moral hazard problem in banking institutions?

 6.  This chapter discussed several of the advantages of maintaining private regulatory bodies for securities markets. What might be some of the disadvantages to this type of securities market regulation?  
7.  Some people commented that the Securities Act of 1933 was based on the “sunlight theory of regulation,” which is analogous to others saying that “those who are forced to undress in public will presumably pay some attention to their figures.” What do these commentators mean by such expressions?

 8.  The United States has maintained a “rules-based” approach to securities regulation while the UK has been progressing to a “principles-based” system of securities regulation. a.  Consider the rules-based and principles-based regulatory approaches to traffic speed limits. How might speed limit regulations be phrased in either case? b.  Why might rules-based speed limit regulations be more difficult to implement? c.  Why might principles-based speed limit regulations be more difficult to enforce?

 9. a.  Discuss the differences between “best price” and “best execution” with respect to order handling. b.  Describe how following the SEC’s Order Protection Rule (best price) can conflict with “best execution,” particularly in the scenario involving a block order. c.  The “Best Price” component of Reg NMS has been criticized as being counterproductive in that it can serve to prevent brokers from working orders to obtain the best executions for their clients. In Section 1.6, we discussed various types of orders that can be placed in markets. Which of those order types can serve the purpose of obtaining “best execution” when other order types would be executed under “best price” rules?

 10.  As a shareholder-owned business, the primary responsibility of the NYSE is to its shareholders. As an SRO, the primary responsibility of the NYSE is to maintain the integrity of markets and to protect investors. There are obvious possible conflicts of interest here. However, make an argument that this apparently conflicting set of responsibilities need not impair the ability of the NYSE to fulfill its responsibilities.

 11.  A non-U.S. company incurs a significant expense due to regulatory and exchange requirements when it lists its stock (or an ADR for its stock) on the NYSE. Furthermore, many such firms will remain regulated by their host countries. Some observers suggest that this significant regulatory expense is necessarily incurred by the listing firm in order to access the deeper U.S. capital markets. What other reasons might a non-U.S. firm have for incurring the significant expenses of listing on the NYSE, perhaps in addition to a market in its host country?

 12.  What is the primary difference between compensation clawback and malus provisions?

 13.  The United States Congress and the SEC worked towards and issued Regulation NMS anticipating that traders would post their best quotations, to the benefit of other traders and the marketplace. Have trading participants in the marketplace acted so as to circumvent the good intentions of Congress and the SEC? If so, how?  
