---
tags:
  - case_study
  - cds_index
  - credit_deterioration
  - jpmorgan_chase
  - london_whale
aliases:
  - JPM
  - JPMorgan
  - London Whale
key_concepts:
  - CDS index tranches
  - Credit deterioration
  - Index notional amount
  - JPMorgan Chase losses
  - Synthetic Credit Portfolio
---

# 14.13 CASE STUDY: THE LONDON WHALE  

In the first half of 2012, JPMorgan Chase (JPM) lost more than $\$6$ billion on its "London Whale" trades. With assets at the time of over. $\$2$ trillion and 2012 income of $\$21$ billion, the loss in no sense endangered the bank, but it was large and embarrassing. In this chapter, the case is used to explain more fully the workings of index CDS and CDS tranches, though other lessons. include the need to define the purpose and scope of hedging programs and. the importance of sizing trades so as not to "become the market."28  

# Index CDS and Tranches  

The important instruments for understanding the events of the case are CDX.NA.IG.9 and its tranches. As described earlier in the chapter, CDX.NA.IG is an equally weighted index of 125 investment-grade North American entities. The " $.9^{\mathfrak{s}}$ indicates a particular series of this index, which came out in the third quarter of 2007. Hence, 10-year protection on this index expired in December 2017 and five-year protection in December 2012. As the London Whale events unfolded in the first quarter of 2012, 10-year CDS on this index matured in just under six years, and five-year CDS on the index matured in just under a year.  

As of April 2012, four of the 125 names in CDS.NA.IG.9 had experienced credit events during the financial crisis of 2007-2009 and, therefore, had dropped out of the index: CIT, a subprime mortgage lender; WAMU, a Savings and Loan Association; Fannie Mae, a government sponsored mortgage agency; and Freddie Mac, a government sponsored mortgage agency. Table 14.17 shows the impact of these four credit events on the index. The second column shows the final price in the CDS auction for each of the names. To understand the third column, consider $\$123$ million original notional amount of the index, which would include $\$1$ million notional amount in each of the underlying $125$ names. Given an auction price of 68.125 for CIT obligations, $\$1$ million notional amount of CDS on CIT lost $(100\%-68.125\%)\times\$81$ million, or $\$318,750$ , which is $0.255\%$ on the index notional amount of $\$123$ million. Similar calculations for the rest of the names give the rest of the third column, which sum to a total index loss of $0.715\%$ , or $\$893,750$ on the original $\$123$ million index notional amount. In summary then, over the life of $\$123$ million notional amount of this index, protection sellers paid protection buyers $\$893,750$ for four credit events, and the remaining notional amount fell to $\$121$ million. Additionally, of the remaining names in the index, five had CDS spreads of over 500 basis points and four has spreads of about 400 basis points. In other words, while issued as an investment-grade index, this series experienced significant credit deterioration.  

TABLE 14.17Names Dropped from CDX.NA.IG.9, as of April 2012. Index Loss in Percent.   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Price in CDS Auction</td><td>Index Loss</td></tr><tr><td>CIT</td><td>68.125</td><td>0.255</td></tr><tr><td>WAMU</td><td>57.000</td><td>0.344</td></tr><tr><td>FannieMae</td><td>91.510</td><td>0.068</td></tr><tr><td>FreddieMac</td><td>94.000</td><td>0.048</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>0.715</td></tr></table></body></html>  

As for CDS index tranches in the context of CDX.NA.IG.9, Table 14.18 describes compensation payments and Table 14.19 describes premium pay-e ments and pricing. Starting with Table 14.18, note that the index notional in this example is fixed at $\$123$ million, and consider the Senior Mezzanine tranche. Its original, "Before Losses" attachment point of $7\%$ means that sellers of protection on this tranche do not have to make any compensation payments unless losses on the index exceed $7\%$ , or $\$8.75$ million on the. $\$123$ million index notional. If losses are $8\%$ , for example, sellers of protection on the Senior Mezzanine tranche have to pay protection buyers on this tranche. $(8\%-7\%)\times\S125,000,000$ , or $\$1.25$ million. The tranche's "Before Losses" detachment point of $10\%$ means that sellers of protection stop making compensation payments when losses exceed $10\%$ or $\$12.5$ million. In fact, the original notional amount of the Senior Mezzanine tranche is $\$3.75$ million, precisely because sellers of protection on this tranche have no further responsibilities after paying protection buyers $(10\%-7\%)\times$ $\$123,4000,7000$ , or $\$3.75$ million.  

TABLE 14.18 Structure of Tranches on CDX.NA.IG.9, as of April 2012. Attachment and Detachment Points Are in Percent. Notional Amounts Are in Dollars.   


<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">Before Losses</td><td colspan="3">AfterLosses</td></tr><tr><td>Tranche</td><td>Attach</td><td>Detach</td><td>Notional</td><td>Attach</td><td>Detach</td><td>Notional</td></tr><tr><td>Equity</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>3,750,000</td><td>0</td><td>2.361</td><td>2,856,250</td></tr><tr><td>Jr. Mezz.</td><td>3</td><td>7</td><td>5,000,000</td><td>2.361</td><td>6.493</td><td>5,000,000</td></tr><tr><td>Sr. Mezz.</td><td>7</td><td>10</td><td>3,750,000</td><td>6.493</td><td>9.592</td><td>3,750,000</td></tr><tr><td>Sr.</td><td>10</td><td>15</td><td>6,250,000</td><td>9.592</td><td>14.757</td><td>6,250,000</td></tr><tr><td>1st Super Sr.</td><td>15</td><td>30</td><td>18,750,000</td><td>14.757</td><td>30.253</td><td>18,750,000</td></tr><tr><td>2nd Super Sr.</td><td>30</td><td>100</td><td>87,500,000</td><td>30.253</td><td>100.00</td><td>84,393,750</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Index</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Now consider the equity tranche. From the "Before Losses" columns, protection sellers on this tranche have to pay protection buyers from the first loss - the attachment point of $0\%$ - until losses reach $3\%$ . The "After Losses" column shows what happened to the equity tranche given the losses to CDX.NA.IG.9 through April 2012, as described in Table 14.17. With the index losing. $0.715\%$ , sellers of protection on the equity tranche had to pay protection buyers. $0.715\%$ of $\$123$ million, or $\$893,750$ . Hence, the notional amount of the equity tranche was reduced from its original $\$3,750,000$ to the After Losses" notional of $\$3,750,000$ minus $\$893,750$ , or $\$2,856,250$ . Furthermore, with these losses arising from credit events in four names, each with $\$1$ million notional amount, the notional of the index referenced by the tranches fell from the original $\$123$ million to $\$121$ million. Finally, because sellers of protection on the equity tranche can be obliged to pay no more than their remaining notional amount of $\$2,856,250$ , the "After Losses" detachment fell from the original $3\%$ to $\$123,456,780/45121,000,000$ or $2.361\%$  

With protection sellers of the equity tranche paying compensation. as just described, the attachment and detachment points of the rest of the tranches shifted as well. Protection sellers on the Junior Mezzanine tranche start paying where the equity tranche leaves off, at $2.361\%$ and stop at $6.493\%$ , when their notional of $\$5$ million is exhausted: $(6.493\%-2.361\%)\times\S121.000,000=\S5.000,000.$ The new attachment and detachment points of the remaining tranches are determined similarly. As for the "After Losses" notional amounts, that of the equity tranche. falls, as explained, while all others, which have not yet experienced losses, remain the same, except for the most senior tranche. With only. $\$121$ million notional amount of the index remaining, and with the notional amounts of all the other tranches set as just described, the absolute worst-case loss for the Second Super Senior tranche is a loss of the residual notional amount of $\$84,393,750$ .(While the attachment point of this tranche increases from $30\%$ to $30.253\%$ , it starts to bear losses at the same dollar amount as before: $30\%\times\S125,000,000=\S37,500,000$ is the same as $\$893,750$ - the losses already incurred - plus the new dollar attachment point of $30.253\%\times\$121,000,000=\$36,606,250.$  

Table 14.18 includes all tranches so as to compare their cash flows given credit events, but tranches exist independently of each other. A particular tranche with a particular notional amount is created when a protection seller trades that tranche with a protection buyer. CDS index tranches are synthetic in the sense that there is no underlying portfolio of actual index CDS. The underlying CDS index is used solely to determine the compensation payments of the tranches.  

Moving to premium payments and pricing, Table 14.19 repeats the. tranche names and original attachment points and gives the coupon and upfront amounts for each as of mid-May 2021. Not surprisingly, protection. buyers pay more, and protection sellers receive more, for the more junior tranches, which experience losses earlier. A buyer of protection on $\$1$ million notional of the $3{-}7\%$ or Junior Mezzanine tranche, for example, pays a running 500 basis points or $\$50,000$ per year plus an upfront amount of $29.43\%$ or $\$294,300$ . By contrast, a buyer of protection on $\$1$ million notional of the $15{-}30\%$ or First Super Senior tranche pays a running $\$10,000$ plus an upfront amount of $\$6,700$  

Table 14.19 also reports the delta of each tranche, expressed in index equivalents. For example, the sensitivity of the $7-10\%$ tranche to changes in credit spreads is 5.18 times the sensitivity of the underlying index. The $15{-}30\%$ tranche, on the other hand, is 1.30 times as sensitive as the index.. The delta of the tranches tend to decline with seniority, from the $3{-}7\%$ to the $30{-}100\%$ tranche: the higher the seniority, the less likely losses are to impact the tranche, and the lower the delta. The delta of the equity tranche, however, is less than that of the $3{-}7\%$ and $7-10\%$ tranches. Imagine for a moment that the remaining equity tranche notional was almost certain to be wiped out by future losses. In that case, marginal increases or decreases. in credit spreads would not change the price of the equity tranche by much.  

IABLE 14.19 Pricing of Tranches on CDX.NA.IG.9 Maturing in December 2017, as of Mid-May 2012. Attachment, Detachment, and Upfront Amounts Are in Percent. Coupon Is in Basis Points..   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Tranche</td><td>Attach</td><td>Detach</td><td>Upfront</td><td>Coupon</td><td>Delta</td></tr><tr><td>Equity</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>72.71</td><td>500</td><td>3.92</td></tr><tr><td>Jr.Mezzanine</td><td>3</td><td>7</td><td>29.43</td><td>500</td><td>6.58</td></tr><tr><td>Sr.Mezzanine</td><td>7</td><td>10</td><td>6.85</td><td>500</td><td>5.18</td></tr><tr><td>Sr.</td><td>10</td><td>15</td><td>9.80</td><td>100</td><td>2.96</td></tr><tr><td>1st Super Sr.</td><td>15</td><td>30</td><td>0.67</td><td>100</td><td>1.30</td></tr><tr><td>2nd Super Sr.</td><td>30</td><td>100</td><td>-3.88</td><td>100</td><td>0.29</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Those same marginal changes to credit spreads would, by contrast, have a significant impact on the as yet untouched $3{-}7\%$ tranche. The situation in Table 14.19, although not nearly as extreme, is analogous: the high coupon and the high upfront payment of the equity tranche indicate a very high expectation of large losses in the future. Part of this, by the way, is due to the nine high-spread names in the index at the time, as mentioned earlier.  

While not directly evident from the table, the market's views on the correlations of defaults across names in the index is a significant determinant of relative tranche value. Given the probabilities of default for each name, higher correlations of those defaults imply more defaults and a higher likelihood of wiping out the more junior tranches and of inflicting some losses on more senior tranches. Moving from low to moderate correlations, therefore, would impact the prices of the junior tranches most. Moving from moderate to high correlations, however, might have a particularly large impact on the prices of the senior tranches, which had before seemed untouchable.  

# The Synthetic Credit Portfolio (ScP)  

With this introduction to CDS indexes and tranches complete, the text turns to the case proper, beginning with the chief investment office (CIO) of JPM as of the end of 2011. The job of the CIO was to invest funds in a wide range. of high-quality fixed income products, with the objectives of meeting the future liquidity needs of the bank and of earning a reasonable rate of return. The amount of funds available to the CIO had increased dramatically, from $\$76.5$ billion in 2007 to $\$365$ billion in 2011, with the greatest increase. during the financial crisis of 2007-2009 as JPM, with its "fortress balance sheet," attracted about $\$100$ billion of deposits.  

The CIO launched its Synthetic Credit Portfolio (SCP) in 2007 to protect. the bank's investments and loans from adverse credit scenarios. The SCP was often short credit (i.e., taking positions that do well when credit conditions deteriorate), but sometimes sold CDS protection and was sometimes overall long credit. In hindsight, the CIO can be criticized for not identifying a particular portfolio of assets it was hedging with SCP and for not articulating a particular hedging policy. In any case, SCP did earn profits: somewhere between $\$200$ million and $\$625$ million in 2007; $\$170$ million in 2008; $\$1.05$ billion in 2009, primarily from a bet on General Motors' bankruptcy;. $\$149$ million in 2010, while consciously shrinking the book; and. $\$453,$ lion in 2011, mostly due to having bought protection on American Airlines that expired just three weeks after its bankruptcy.  

With this history, the SCP ended 2011 with $\$51$ billion of net CDS notional. It was overall short credit, though it was both long and short particular indexes and tranches, and it had on the relative value trade of being long investment-grade credits and short high-yield credits. Various documents and correspondence made clear that SCP intended to trade credit risk actively, as opposed to hedging exposures held elsewhere in the bank. It had developed a bullish view on the economy and planned, in 2012, to establish a long credit position. It also planned to continue to trade opportunistically, for example: to maintain "smart" shorts on credit; it likes cheap options"; profit from defaults without paying "too much"; and repeat the successful trade on American Airlines but avoid losses like the $\$50$ million lost on Kodak's default in January 2012. Finally, going into 2012, the CIO realized that its positions were becoming so large that unwinds would incur extremely large transaction costs.29  

The four active strategies pursued by SCP in 2012 all performed poorly:  

1. SCP went long credit, changing its sensitivity to credit spreads from a relatively mild short in late 2011 to a long of. $\$60$ million per basis point. This positioning did well as credit spreads fell through the end of March, but spreads then rose dramatically, which inflicted significant losses. SCP expressed its long position mostly by buying CDX.NA.IG.9. Because this index contained several high-yield names, as mentioned before, its purchase would also hedge some of SCP's existing high-yield shorts. While in some ways logical, this was a dangerous choice. First, as mentioned previously, SCP positions were already becoming too large relative to the liquidity of the market. Therefore, buying CDX.NA.IG.9 to hedge shorts, instead of just buying back those shorts, made the portfolio even larger and more unwieldy. Second, SCP's oversized position in CDX.NA.IG.9 exposed it to predatory trading by other market participants. As a result, as discussed further presently, CDX.NA.IG.9 underperformed its constituent CDS so that SCP lost more money from the increase in credit spreads than it might have otherwise.  

2. SCP continued its relative value trade of being long investment-grade risk and short high-yield risk. This strategy lost money as the difference between high-yield and investment-grade yields fell from 560 basis points in December 2011 to 480 basis points in March 2012, though the difference recovered to 527 basis points by mid-April.  

3. SCP put on an investment-grade flattener, betting that the difference between long-term investment-grade spreads and short-term investment-grade spreads would narrow. SCP chose to implement this. strategy with IG.9 as well, using the once 10-year and once five-year. expirations mentioned already. This strategy lost money too, with the. spread between the 10- and five-year CDS indexes rising from 16 basis. points in December 2011 to 48 basis points by mid-April..  

4. SCP sold the "belly" of CDS index tranches and bought the equity tranche and the index itself. Again SCP favored IG.9 tranches, because they had historically traded with relatively high liquidity. SCP lost money here as well. Focusing on IG.9, SCP was short mostly in the $10{-}15\%$ and the $15{-}30\%$ tranches, while long the index and the $30{-}100\%$ tranche. As credit spreads rose, both the index and all the tranches fell in value. But the relative price changes were surprising. The price of the $30{-}100\%$ tranche fell a lot, as if the names in the index were highly correlated, while the $10{-}15\%$ and $15{-}30\%$ tranches fell less, as if there were limited increases in correlation. SCP lost money, therefore, because it was long the tranche that underperformed and short the tranches that outperformed. As discussed presently, this price. action may very well have been due to SCP having an oversized position. in IG.9 and its tranches.  

Losses across these strategies were $\$718$ million in the first quarter of 2012 and an additional $\$1.5$ billion loss in April. Management of the SCP portfolio was taken away from the CIO at the end of April, but the positions. continued to lose money, mounting to a cumulative loss through the end of. June 2012 of $\$5.8$ billion. At this point, many of the positions were moved to. other parts of the bank, which made it impossible for the public to determine the ultimate losses from the portfolio.  

The raw size of SCP positions magnified its losses. SCP's total CDS notional amount rose from $\$51$ billion at the end of 2011 to $\$157.1$ at the end of March 2012. These positions were also very large relative to trading. volume. Its position in IG.9 indexes at that time was over 10 days of average daily trading volume, and its position in one of the iTraax series was over eight times average daily volume. The impact of these large positions can be seen both from market prices and from the behavior of market participants. at that time.  

With respect to market prices, consider the 10-year IG.9 skew, which is defined as the difference between the spread of the underlying CDS and the 10-year IG.9 CDS spread. The more positive the spread, the richer the IG.9 spread relative to its constituents. This skew rose from about 10 basis points in July 2011, reached a high of 35 basis points in fall 2011, and was about 25 basis points at the start of 2012. In hindsight, the richness of the IG.9 index skew was likely caused by SCP's aggressive buying of the index.  

With respect to the behavior of market participants, hedge funds had. noticed the skew and, into 2012, bought the cheap constituents and sold. the rich IG.9. They knew, however, that SCP's large index purchases might. very well keep the skew high, which turned out to be the case. News articles appeared in early April, likely encouraged by these funds, mentioning. the large positions of JPM's CIO, attributing the persistent skew to these. positions, and questioning whether the incoming Volcker rule would force  

JPM to liquidate these positions. These articles, together with some efforts by SCP to reduce positions, encouraged market participants to bet on an. upcoming liquidation, that is, to sell IG.9, which SCP would ultimately have to sell, and to buy the constituent CDS as a hedge. This activity, narrowed the skew, of course, causing IG.9 to underperform and to inflict additional losses on SCP's portfolio. At first, JPM responded to the news articles by saying that the CIO's positions could be held indefinitely. But with credit spreads rising, SCP losses mounting, and the market increasingly aware of. SCP's predicament, the hedge funds won. SCP's portfolio would be at least partially unwound, and the skew fell to zero by July 2012. In fact, some hedge funds unwound their IG.9 shorts - at a profit - by buying IG.9 directly from SCP as part of its unwind..  

# Mortgages and. Mortgage-Backed Securities  

Ameortgage is loan colateralized by poperty. This chapter focuses on money to purchase a home on the collateral of that home.  

The most common mortgage loans in the United States are for 30 years and carry fixed rates of interest. They require equal monthly payments, with each allocated in part to interest (which in many cases is tax deductible) and in part to paying down principal. Mortgages also give homeowners the option to pay off or prepay all or part of the outstanding balance at any time. An implication of these contractual features is that, when mortgage rates fall, homeowners can profitably refinance their existing, high-rate mortgages by prepaying them with money raised from new, lower-rate mortgages. Homeowners also have to prepay when they sell a property, because the property is the collateral behind the mortgage. Details are discussed throughout the chapter, but the extent to which homeowners prepay is a key risk factor for lenders and investors: mortgages that carry an above-market rate lose value when homeowners prepay, while those that carry a below-market rate gain value with prepayments.  

Another key risk factor is default. While mortgages are collateralized by. homes, lenders can lose principal if a homeowner defaults when the value. of the home is less than the outstanding balance on the mortgage. Lenders. protect themselves against this scenario by lending less than the value of the home at the time of purchase, that is, by requiring that the original. loan-to-value (LTV) ratio be less than some amount, typically. $80\%$ . The resulting buffer may not turn out to be sufficient, however, if the value of the home falls dramatically. Furthermore, with respect to any residual mortgage. liability above the value of the home, lenders may or may not have recourse. to the homeowner's other assets, depending on the laws of the relevant state.  

The first section of the chapter describes the mortgage market in. the United States, and the large role played by government agencies. Sections 15.2 to 15.4 introduce the payment conventions of mortgage loans, both fixed and floating rate, and the value of the prepayment option for fixed-rate loans. Sections 15.5 to 15.7 discuss mortgage pools, the most basic mortgage-backed security (MBs), along with their pricing and risk profiles. Sections 15.8 to 15.10 present the TBA and specified pools markets, and how they are used for hedging and financing. Section 15.11 deals with other types of MBS and Section 15.12 explains credit risk transfer (CRT) securities.  
