---
tags:
  - bank_loans
  - commercial_paper
  - corporate_bonds
  - corporate_loans
  - floating_rate
  - mtns
aliases:
  - Bond Markets
  - Corporate Debt
  - Debt Instruments
key_concepts:
  - Bank loan features
  - Commercial paper (CP)
  - Corporate bond characteristics
  - Corporate borrowing methods
  - Floating-rate notes (FRNs)
  - Medium-term notes (MTNs)
  - Private placement bonds
---

# 14.1 CORPORATE BONDS AND LOANS  

Large and highly creditworthy corporations in the United States tend to borrow money for fixed terms in public markets through commercial paper (CP), medium-term notes (MTNs), and corporate bonds. CP is typically a discount (i.e., zero coupon) instrument that is either unsecured, backed by a letter of credit from a bank, or secured by assets. CP is exempt from Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) registration, along with its associated costs, so long as the paper matures in less than 270 days and its proceeds are used for short-term purposes (rather than, for example, building a factory). With its high credit quality and short-term maturity, CP is a particularly inexpensive and liquid way for the most creditworthy corporations to raise short-term funds. CP borrowing does, however, expose a corporation to the funding or liquidity risk of having to roll outstanding CP as it matures into new CP issues.  

Corporations sell MTNs in public markets to raise money with customized payment terms. Historically, MTNs primarily filled the maturity gap between CP and longer-term bonds but are now better characterized as debt instruments customized to suit the needs of individual issuers and investors. MTNs first became popular in the United States in the early 1980s, with the introduction of SEC shelf registrations. These programs allow issuers to register once to sell notes opportunistically, over time, at terms that can be adjusted at the time of each sale..  

For longer-term borrowing in public markets with relatively standard payment terms, corporations sell bonds, which, in the United States, have to be registered with the SEC. Corporate bonds are typically coupon-bearing, fixed-rate securities, but there is a much smaller market for floating-rate notes (FRNs). The interest rate on FRNs is typically set equal to a short-term reference rate plus a fixed spread, although a reference rate might be multiplied by a factor or leverage, and the spread might vary over time with. the credit rating of the issuer. The short-term reference rate for FRNs had. traditionally been the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) but is now transitioning to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) and other. non-LIBOR alternatives (Chapters 12 and 13).  

Smaller and less creditworthy corporations, which cannot typically raise. funds in public markets, tend to borrow money through private placements of bonds and through bank loans. In a privately placed bond issue, the. borrower tailors terms to satisfy its own requirements and those of a relatively small group of lenders. Insurance companies are the most significant investors in this market, though other asset managers participate as well.. Privately placed bonds are exempt from SEC registration precisely because they may be sold only to investors deemed "sophisticated.".  

Bank loans tend to be floating-rate instruments, although borrowers sometimes convert their debt into a fixed rate by paying fixed to and receiving floating from a bank in an accompanying interest rate swap, which the bank, in turn, hedges with a dealer (Chapter 13). From the bank perspective, floating-rate loans have the advantage of matching floating-rate liabilities, which are mostly deposits, but also include wholesale funding like commercial paper. Also, floating-rate loans are the easiest to sell in the secondary market for bank loans.  

Traditionally, banks made loans and held them to term. And if a single. borrower needed a loan that was too large for one bank, either because funds were not readily available or, more likely, because the resulting credit risk would be too significant for one bank, several banks would form a group or. syndicate in which each would make and hold a smaller loan to that large borrower. The last few decades, however, have seen phenomenal growth in the secondary market for loans, which allows banks to sell loans they have made to institutional investors. In this way, banks can earn fees on making, servicing, and monitoring loans without having to warehouse all of the associated credit risk. At present, in fact, the overwhelming majority of relatively low-quality or leveraged loans are held not by banks, but by. institutional investors. While some leveraged loans are bought from banks directly by insurance companies, mutual funds, and hedge funds, much of. the growth of the secondary market for bank loans has been through the indirect sale of loans to institutional investors through collateralized loan obligations (CLOs).  

# Collateralized Loan Obligations  

A CLO is a vehicle that purchases a portfolio of leveraged loans financed by the sale of several debt classes or tranches and equity or subordinated notes. Table 14.2 lists the debt tranches of a particular CLO issued in May 2019. Essentially, interest and principal payments from the underlying portfolio of leveraged loans flow to the tranches from the top down, while any credit losses are allocated from the bottom up.2 Senior Secured Floating-Rate Note  

TABLE 14.2 Tranches of Apidos CLO XXXI, May 2019. All Tranches Mature in April 2031.   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Class</td><td>Description</td><td>Amount (Smillions) S&P/Moody's LIBOR (bps)</td><td>Rating</td><td>Spread over</td></tr><tr><td>X</td><td>Sr.Secured FRNs</td><td>4.725</td><td>AAA/-</td><td>65</td></tr><tr><td>A-1</td><td>Sr.Secured FRNs</td><td>370.150</td><td>AAA/Aaa</td><td>133</td></tr><tr><td>A-2</td><td>Sr.Secured FRNs</td><td>39.350</td><td>-/Aaa</td><td>165</td></tr><tr><td>B</td><td>Sr.Secured FRNs</td><td>64.600</td><td>AA/-</td><td>190</td></tr><tr><td>C</td><td>MezzanineSecuredDeferrableFRNs</td><td>40.300</td><td>A/-</td><td>255</td></tr><tr><td>D</td><td>MezzanineSecuredDeferrableFRNs</td><td>36.200</td><td>BBB-/-</td><td>365</td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td>MezzanineSecuredDeferrableFRNs</td><td>27.400</td><td>-/Ba3</td><td>675</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Subordinated Notes</td><td>51.400</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>634.125</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

Classes X, A-1, A-2, and B are paid interest and principal from the underlying loans, while Mezzanine Secured Deferrable classes C, D, and E are paid to the extent that additional cash flows from the underlying loans are available. Any credit losses from the underlying loans are first applied to the equity or Subordinated Notes, then to the Mezzanine tranches, and only then, if necessary, to the Senior Secured tranches. Furthermore, CLO debt tranches are protected by constraints imposed on the creditworthiness of the underlying loans and on the concentration of loans to a particular borrower or industry, along with various ongoing tests as to the sufficiency of interest and collateral. In short, this CLO, from an underlying portfolio of $\$634,125,000$ leveraged loans, created $\$414,23,400$ of X, A-1, and A-2 tranches with AAA or Aaa ratings; an additional $\$64,600,000$ tranches with an AA rating; and so forth.  

Compensation for buying lower-rated tranches comes in the form of earning a higher spread. As shown in the last column if Table 14.2, spreads range from 65 basis points for the AAA-rated X Class to 675 basis points for the Ba3-rated Class E tranche. The return on equity, of course, is determined by whatever is left over after paying all of the more senior claims.  

The different credit risk profiles of the different tranches in a CLO tend to attract different groups of investors. Banks tend to hold or purchase the AAA/Aaa and AA/Aa tranches; insurance companies and pension funds invest in a range of tranches; and hedge funds and alternative asset managers buy the lower-rate tranches. Outside investors and the CLO originators hold the equity.  

By way of summarizing trends over the last few decades, the growth of the secondary market for leveraged loans, abetted by the CLO market, has blurred the distinction between leveraged loans and high-yield bonds. Corporations have greater flexibility to borrow in one market or the other, and asset managers actively decide to invest in one market or the other, with all choices depending on individual preferences or requirements and on market conditions.  

# Seniority, Covenants, and Call Provisions  

When selling a debt issue, a corporation enters into a contract with bondholders, called an indenture, which is enforced by a trustee. Aside from payment terms (e.g., interest, principal, and maturity), the indenture specifies the priority of the issue in the event of default. For example, one bond. issue might be secured by a particular set of assets; a second might be unsecured, but "senior" to other issues; and a third might be "subordinated" to higher-ranking issues. In this example, should a corporation be reorganized or liquidated through bankruptcy according to "strict priority," proceeds from selling ring-fenced assets would be applied first to satisfy the claims. of the secured bondholders. Any remaining proceeds, together with other assets of the corporation, would be applied next to satisfy the claims of the senior bondholders. Finally, whatever value remains would be used to satisfy the claims of the subordinated bondholders. In practice, because reorganizations involve negotiation and include equity holders, strict priority may not. always precisely predict the settlement of debt claims.  

Indentures also include covenants to protect the claims of bondholders. Examples include maintaining various financial ratios; restricting the amount of cash that can be paid to stockholders; requiring a corporation to repurchase a debt issue after a change of control; limiting the total amount of new debt incurred by the corporation; and preventing the sale of debt with higher seniority than that of an outstanding debt issue.  

As a final point of discussion, indentures often include call provisions or embedded call options, which allow a corporation to repurchase bonds from bondholders at some fixed schedule of prices. A simple example would be a 20-year bond that the company can repurchase at par or face value anytime after 10 years. A more complex example would be a $4\%$ 30-year bond that the company can repurchase after 10 years at a price of 102 (100 plus half the coupon); at a price of 101.90 after 11 years; at a price of 101.80 after 12 years.  

The original purpose of call provisions was to enable corporations to extinguish a bond issue -- without having to track down and purchase every outstanding bond - perhaps to remove covenants that prohibited what had become value-added activities, or perhaps to change the corporation's exist-. ing capital structure. As interest rates became more volatile in the early 1980s, these call provisions became valuable as interest rate options: the. value of the right to purchase a bond at some fixed price increases as rates decline (bond prices increase) and also as rate volatility increases. At the same time, of course, corporations issuing debt with call provisions have to pay investors for that option through a higher coupon rate. Chapter 16 describes the pricing of these call provisions..  

TABLE 14.3  Call Provision of the Hertz 6s of 01/15/2028. The Bond Was Issued in November 2019.   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Dates</td><td>CallPrice</td></tr><tr><td>Before01/15/2023</td><td>Make-WholePrice@Yieldofthe Treasury 2.75s of 02/15/2028 +50bps</td></tr><tr><td>01/15/2023to01/14/2024</td><td>103.00</td></tr><tr><td>01/15/2024to01/14/2025</td><td>101.50</td></tr><tr><td>Onorafter01/15/2025</td><td>100.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Since the mid-1990s, however, the most common call provision has become the make-whole call. For example, in a private placement in November 2019, Hertz sold the 6s of 01/15/2028, with the make-whole call provision described in Table 14.3. Before January 15, 2023, Hertz can repurchase the bonds from investors at a yield 50 basis points above the yield of the US Treasury 2.75s of 02/15/2028. From January 15, 2023, on, the call is at the schedule of fixed prices shown in the table. The idea behind the make-whole call is to give the issuer flexibility to manage its debt without its having to purchase an expensive interest rate option. Unlike the case of a call price that is fixed, when yields fall, the yield of the Treasury benchmark falls too, and the make-whole call price increases. Hence, the interest rate option value of the make-whole call is extremely limited. In fact, in theory, the make-whole call has option value only if the market spread of the Hertz bonds over Treasuries falls: in that scenario, the value. of the Hertz bond increases without a corresponding fall in the yield of the Treasury bond and a corresponding increase of the make-whole price. In. practice, however, the value of this spread option is mitigated by setting the make-whole spread out-of-the-money. For example, when Hertz issued. the 6s of 01/15/2028 in November 2019, its spread over the Treasury benchmark was 423 basis points. This means that its bond spread would have to fall a very large. $423-50$ or 373 basis points before the make-whole. provision was in-the-money as an option on spread. Overall, of course, the call provision of the Hertz 6s of 01/15/2028 derives option value from the schedule of fixed call prices from January 15, 2023..  
