---
tags:
  - '#arbitrage_opportunities'
  - '#collateralized_debt_obligations_cdos'
  - '#credit_derivatives'
  - '#credit_linked_notes_clns'
  - '#default_correlation'
  - '#default_swaps'
  - '#hedging_strategies'
  - '#synthetic_corporate_bonds'
  - '#trigger_intensity_model'
---
# 778 CHAPTER 21 SECURITIZATION, ABSs, CDOs  

a.What is the iTraxx index?   
b.What is a standard tranche?   
c. Explain the differences between trading standardized tranches and the tranches of CDOs issued in the market place.  

6. (Reduced form approach to CoCos valuation). The text mentions that CoCos can be valued from three different perspectives. One of the approaches is based on the reduced form or default intensity approach outlined in Chapter 18. Assume that a $\mathrm{{CoCo}}$ has a 5-year maturity. The underlying share price (S) is 100, the equity volatility is $20\%$ and there are no dividend payments. The continuously compounded interest rate is $4\%$ . Assume that the trigger event. occurs then the share price (S) reaches the trigger price of $S^{*}=\pounds50$ Calculate the credit spread using the trigger intensity model. Consult the end of chapter references for a derivation of the required probability of hitting the trigger, the trigger intensity and the recovery rate.  

Consider the following reading, which deals with collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Despite the deluge of downgrades in the collateralized debt obligation (CDO) market, banks are not focusing on the effect of interest rate swaps on arbitrage cash flow CDOs, Fitch Ratings said in a report released last week.  

Ineffective interest rate hedging strategies inflicted the hardest blows to the performance of high-yield bond CDOs completed during 1997-1999, the report noted..  

This combination of events caused some CDOs to become significantly over-hedged and. out-of-the-money on their swap positions at the same time, the report found. For its report, Fitch used a random sample of 18 cash-flow deals that recently experienced downgrades.  

While half the CDOs benefited from falling rates, half did not. All nine of the over-hedged CDOs were high-yield bond transactions that closed before 1999.  

With the benefit of hindsight, a balanced guaranteed or customized swap would have mitigated the over-hedged CDO's risks. Plain vanilla swaps, which were economically advantageous during 1997-1999, ended up costing money in the long run because the notional balance of the swap is set at the deal's closing date and does not change over time, the report said. CDOs tend to use a plain vanilla swap instead of a customized swap because they are cheaper. (Thomson Reuters IFR Issue 1433, May 2002)  

a. Show the cash flows generated by a simple CDO on a graph. Suppose you are short the CDO. b. What are your risks and how would you hedge them?   
c. Show the cash flows of the CDO together with a hedge obtained using a plain vanilla swap. d. As time passes, default rates increase and interest rates decline, what happens to the CDO and to the hedge?   
e. What does the reading refer to with buying a customized swap?  

# CASE STUDY: CREDIT-LINKED NOTES  

Read the following case study and answer the questions below. Overall, this case study deals with CDSs, synthetic corporate bonds, and, more interestingly, credit-linked notes.. The case study highlights two issues. a. Cash flows and the risks associated with these instruments, and the reasons why these instruments are issued.   
b. The arbitrage opportunity that was created as a result of some of the recent issuance activity in credit-linked notes. Focus on these aspects when answering the questions that follow the readings.  

# Reading  

Default swap quotes in key corporates have collapsed, as a rush to offset huge synthetic credit-linked notes has. coincided with a shortage of bonds in the secondary market, and with a change in sentiment about the global credit outlook. The scramble to cover short derivatives positions has resulted in windfall arbitrage opportunities for dealers who chanced to be flat, and for their favored customers..  

At least 5bn, and possibly as much as E15bn, equivalent of credit-linked note issuance has been seen in the last month. The resulting offsetting of short-credit default swap positions has caused a sharp widening in the negative basis between default swaps and the asset swap value of the underlying debt in the secondary bond market.  

Dealers with access to corporate bonds have been able to buy default swaps at levels as much as 20 bp under the asset swap value of the debt, and to create synthetic packages for their clients where, in effect, the only risk is to the counterparty on the swap. Credit derivatives dealers who chanced to be flat have been turning huge profits by. proprietary dealing-and from sales of these packages to their favored insurance company customers.  

Deutsche Bank, Merrill Lynch, Bear Stearns, and Citigroup have been among the most aggressive sellers of default swaps in recent weeks, according to dealers at rival houses, and their crossing of bid/offer spreads has driven the negative default-swap basis to bonds ever wider..  

A e2.25bn credit-linked note issued by Deutsche Bank is typical of the deals that have been fuelling this movement. The deal, Deutsche Bank Repon 2001-2014, offered exposure to 150 separate corporate credits, $5I\%$ from the US and 49% from Europe. Because DB had the deal rated, the terms of the issue spread across trading desks in London and New York, and rival dealers pulled back their bids on default swaps in the relevant corporates.  

Other banks were selling similar unrated (and therefore, private) credit-linked notes at the same time, which led to a. scramble to offset swap positions. Faced with a shortage of bonds in the secondary market, and repo rates at. $0\%$ for some corporate issues, dealers were forced to hit whatever bid was available in the default swap market, pushing the. negative basis for many investment grade five-year default swaps from an 8 bp-16 bp negative basis to a 12 bp-20 bp basis last week.  

This produced wild diversity between default swaps for corporates that had seen their debt used for credit-linked notes, and similar companies that had not. Lufthansa five-year default swaps were offered at 29 bp late last week, while British Airways offers in the same maturity were no lower than 50 bp, for example.  

Many default swaps were also very low on an absolute basis. Single A-rated French pharmaceuticals company Aventis was quoted at 16 bp/20 bp for a five-year default swap at the close of dealing on Friday, for example. Other corporate default swaps were also at extremely tight levels, with Rolls-Royce offered as low as 27 bp in the five-year, Volkswagen at 26 bp, BMW offered at least as low as 26b, and Unilever at 21 bp.  

# Run for the Door  

The movement was not limited to European credits. Offsetting of default swaps led to the sale of negative-basis packages in US names including Sears, Bank of America, and Philip Morris, with Bank of America trading at levels below 40 bp in the five-year, or less than half its trade point when fears about US bank credit quality were at their height earlier this year.  

General market sentiment that the worst of the current downturn in credit quality has passed has amplified the effec. of the default swap selling. Investors are happy to hold corporate bonds, which has left dealers struggling to buy paper to cover their positions as an alternative to selling default swaps..  

"Everyone tried to run for the door at the same time," said one head dealer, describing trading in recent weeks. He predicted that the wide negative basis between swaps and bonds will be a trading feature for some time. Dealers worry that the banks which are selling default swaps most aggressively are doing so because they are lining up still more synthetic credit-linked notes. As long as they can maintain a margin between the notes and the level at which they can offset their exposure, they will keep hitting swap bids.  

This collision of default swap-offset needs, a bond shortage, and improved credit sentiment is working in favor of corporate treasurers. WorldCom managed to sell the biggest deal yet from a US corporate last week, and saw spread. talk on what proved to be a Us\$ 11.83bn equivalent deal tighten ahead of pricing. An issue of this size would normally. prompt a sharp widening in default swaps on the relevant corporate, but WorldCom saw its five-year mid quotes fall. from 150 bp two weeks ago to below 140 bp last week.  

The decline in default swap quotes, and widening basis-to-asset swap levels for bonds, has been restricted to Europe and the US so far. If sentiment about the credit quality of Asian corporates improves there could be note issuance and spread movement. The dealers who have been struggling to cover their positions in the supposedly liquid US and European bond-and-swap markets may be reluctant to try the same approach in Asia, however.. With the prospect of more issuance of credit-linked notes on US and European corporates, and maintenance of the wide negative swap-to-bond basis, dealers who are allowed to run proprietary positions--and their insurance company clients-should reap further windfall arbitrage profits. The traders forced to offset deals issued by their structured note. departments face further weeks of anxious hedging, however. (Thomson Reuters IFR, May 12, 2001)  

# Questions  

a. What is a credit-linked note (CLN)? Why would investors buy credit-linked notes instead of, say, corporate bonds?. Analyze the risks and the cash flows generated by these two instruments to see in what sense CLNs are preferable.   
b. Suppose you issue a CLN. How would you hedge your position? Mention at least two ways of doing this. By the. way, why do you need to hedge your position? Be specific.   
c. As a continuation of the previous question, why is whether or not the investors sell their corporate bonds important. in this situation?   
d. Now we come to the arbitrage issue. What is the basis of the arbitrage argument mentioned in this reading? Be. specific and explain in detail. Show your reasoning using cash flow diagrams.   
e.What does a $0\%$ repo rate for some corporate paper mean? Why is the rate zero?   
f. Finally, why would this create an opportunity for corporate treasurers?  

# MATLAB EXERCISE  

9. (Equity derivatives approach to the valuation of $\mathrm{CoCos})$ . Consider a $\mathrm{{CoCo}}$ , denominated in US dollars, with a maturity of 5 years and a face value of $\$1000$ . Assume that the current share price $S$ is $\$100$ and the equity volatility is $20\%$ . The risk-free continuously compounded interest rate is $4\%$ and there are no dividend payments. At the trigger moment a certain fraction $(\alpha)$ of the face value. $(N)$ , that is $\alpha N$ is up for conversion. We assume that the. conversion ( $\angle\alpha=80$ ) will be triggered when the share price. $S$ falls below $\$50$ The conversion price is equal to the price when the. $\mathrm{{CoCo}}$ is issued. Therefore the conversion ratio CR equals $\alpha^{*}1000/100=8$ If the bank would like to issue the. $\mathrm{{CoCo}}$ at par, what should be the coupon. rate offered to the investors in order for the initial price of the CoCo to be $\$1000$ Refer to the end of chapter references for details about the equity derivatives approach to the valuation of CoCos.  

# DEFAULT CORRELATION PRICING AND TRADING  

# 22  

# CHAPTER OUTLINE  

22.1 Introduction. 782   
22.2 Two Simple Examples.. 782   
22.2.1 Portfolio with three credit names .. . 786   
22.2.1.1 Case 1: Independence. 783   
22.2.1.2 Case 2: Perfect correlation. 785   
22.2.2 Sensitivity of Tranche Spreads and Basket Default Swaps to Default Correlation ... 786   
22.2.3 Recent Quotation Convention for CDO Tranches and Evolution of Tranche Spreads .... 787   
22.3 Standard Tranche Valuation Model. .789   
22.3.1 The Gaussian Copula Model 789   
22.3.2 Implied Correlations 791   
22.3.3 The Central Limit Effect.. 794   
22.4 Default Correlation and Trading.. .795   
22.5 Delta Hedging and Correlation Trading . .796   
22.5.1 How to Calculate Deltas.. 797   
22.5.2 Gamma Sensitivity.. 798   
22.5.3 Correlation Trade and Gamma Gains... . 798   
22.6 Real-World Complications .799   
22.6.1 Base Correlations 800   
22.6.2 The Dispersion Effect .. 800   
22.6.3 The Time Effect.. 801   
22.6.4 Do Deltas Add Up to One?. .801   
22.7 Default Correlation Case Study: May 2005. .801   
22.8 Conclusions. .804   
Suggested Reading .804   
Appendix 22.1: Some Basic Statistical Concepts .. .805   
Exercises 806   
MATLAB Exercises.... 808  
