# 16.3 ACCOUNTING ISSUES  

An employee stock option represents a cost to the company and a benefit to the employee just like any other form of compensation. This point, which for many is self-evident, is actually quite controversial. Many corporate executives appear to believe that an option has no value unless it is in the money. As a result, they argue that an at-the-money option issued by the company is not a cost to the company. The reality is that, if options are valuable to employees, they must represent a cost to the company's shareholders--and therefore to the company. There is no free lunch. The cost to the company of the options. arises from the fact that the company has agreed that, if its stock does well, it will sell shares to employees at a price less than that which would apply in the open market..  

Prior to 1995, the cost charged to the income statement of a company when it issued stock options was the intrinsic value. Most options were at the money when they were first issued, so that this cost was zero. In 1995, accounting standard FAS 123 was issued. Many people expected it to require the expensing of options at their fair value. However, as a result of intense lobbying, the 1995 version of FAS 123 only encouraged companies to expense the fair value of the options they granted on the income statement. It did not require them to do so. If fair value was not expensed on the income statement, it had to be reported in a footnote to the company's accounts.  

Accounting standards have now changed to require the expensing of all stock-based. compensation at its fair value on the income statement. In February 2004, the International Accounting Standards Board issued IAS 2 requiring companies to start. expensing stock options in 2005. In December 2004, FAS 123 was revised to require. the expensing of employee stock options in the United States starting in 2005..  

The effect of the new accounting standards is to require options to be valued on the. grant date and the amount to be recorded as an expense in the income statement for the year in which the grant is made. Valuation at a time later than the grant date is not. required. It can be argued that options should be revalued at financial year ends (or. every quarter) until they are exercised or reach the end of their lives.4 This would treat them in the same way as other derivative transactions entered into by the company. If. the option became more valuable from one year to the next, there would then be an additional amount to be expensed. However, if it declined in value, there would be a positive impact on income.  

This approach would have a number of advantages. The cumulative charge to the company would reflect the actual cost of the options (either zero if the options are not exercised or the option payoff if they are exercised). Although the charge in any year would depend on the option pricing model used, the cumulative charge over the life of the option would not. Arguably there would be much less incentive for the company to engage in the backdating practices described later in the chapter. The disadvantage usually cited for accounting in this way is that it is undesirable because it introduces volatility into the income statement.6  

# Alternatives to Stock Options  

The accounting rules which came into effect in 2005 have led companies to consider alternatives to traditional compensation plans where at-the-money stock options are. granted. We have already mentioned restricted stock units (RSUs), which are shares. that will be owned by the employee at a future time (the vesting date). Many companies have replaced stock options by RSUs. A variation on an RSU is a market-leveraged stock unit (MSU), in which the number of shares that will be owned on the vesting date is equal to $S_{T}/S_{0}$ , where $S_{0}$ is the stock price on the grant date and. $S_{T}$ is the stock price on the vesting date.'  

If the stock market as a whole goes up, employees with stock options tend to do well, even if their own company's stock price underperforms the market. One way of overcoming this problem is to tie the strike price of the options to the performance of a broadly based index. Suppose that on the option grant date the stock price is $\$30$ and the index is 2,000. The strike price would initially be set at. $\$30$ . If the index increased by $10\%$ to 2,200, then the strike price would also increase by. $10\%$ to $\$33$ . If the index moved down by $15\%$ to 1,700, then the strike price would also move down by. $15\%$ to $\$23.50$ . The effect of this is that the company's stock price performance has to beat that of the index to become in the money. As an alternative to using a broadly based index as the reference index, the company could use an index of the prices of stocks in the same industrial sector as the company.  
