# 2.3 PLAYERS  

Market makers make markets by providing days to delivery, notice of delivery, warehouses, etc. Market makers provide liquidity and must, as an obligation, buy and sell at their quoted prices.. Thus for every security at which they are making the market, the market maker must quote a bid and an ask price. A market maker does not warehouse a large number of products, nor does the market maker hold them for a long period of time. Different exchanges have different structures and use different approaches in liquidity provision or market making. For example, at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), market making is based on the Designated Market Maker (DMM) system.2o DMMs have the primary responsibility of guaranteeing a fair and orderly market.. Sometimes, this may involve taking the other side of trades when there are short-term buy-and-sellside imbalances in customer orders. In return, the DMM is granted various informational and trade execution advantages.  

Traders buy and sell securities. They do not, in the pure sense of the word, "make"' the markets. A trader's role is to execute clients' orders and trade for the company given his or her position limits. Position limits can be imposed on the total capital the trader is allowed to trade or on the risks that he or she wishes to take.  

A trader or market maker may run a portfolio, called a book. There are "FX books," "options books," "swap books, and "derivatives books, among others. Books run by traders are called "trading books"; they are different from "investment portfolios," which are held for the purpose of investment. Trading books exist because during the process of buying and selling for clients, the trader may have to warehouse these products for a short period of time. These books are hedged periodically. Hedge funds are an important type of arbitrageur in financial markets and we discuss hedge funds in detail in Chapter 7.  

Brokers do not hold inventories. Instead, they provide a platform where the buyers and sellers can get together. Buying and selling through brokers is often more discreet than going to bids and asks of traders. In the latter case, the trader would naturally learn the identity of the client. In open-outcry options markets, a floor-broker is a trader who takes care of a client's order but does not trade for himself or herself. (On the other hand, a market maker does.)  

Dealers quote two-way prices and hold large inventories of a particular instrument, maybe for a. longer period of time than a market maker. They are institutions that act in some sense as market makers.  

Risk managers are relatively new players. Trades, and positions taken by traders, should be. "approved' by risk managers. The risk manager assesses the trade and gives approvals if the trade remains within the preselected boundaries of various risk managers..  

Regulators are important players in financial markets. Practitioners often take positions of "tax arbitrage"' and "regulatory arbitrage." A large portion of financial engineering practices is directed toward meeting the needs of the practitioners in terms of regulation and taxation.  

Researchers and analysts are players who do not trade or make the market. They are information providers for the institutions and are helpful in sell-side activity. Analysts in general deal with. stocks and analyze one or more companies. They can issue buy/sell/hold signals and provide fore-. casts. Researchers provide macrolevel forecasting and advice..  
