# 25.9  ROLE OF CORRELATION IN A BASKET CDS AND CDO  

The cost of protection in a kth-to-default CDS or a tranche of a CDO is critically. dependent on default correlation. Suppose that a basket of 100 reference entities is used. to define a 5-year kth-to-default CDS and that each reference entity has a risk-neutral probability of $2\%$ of defaulting during the 5 years. When the default correlation between the reference entities is zero the binomial distribution shows that the prob-. ability of one or more defaults during the 5 years is $86.74\%$ and the probability of 10 or more defaults is $0.0034\%$ . A first-to-default CDS is therefore quite valuable whereas a. tenth-to-default CDS is worth almost nothing.  

As the default correlation increases the probability of one or more defaults declines and the probability of 10 or more defaults increases. In the limit where the default correlation between the reference entities is perfect the probability of one or more defaults equals the probability of ten or more defaults and is. $2\%$ . This is because in this extreme situation the reference entities are essentially the same. Either they all default (with probability $2\%$ ) or none of them default (with probability $98\%$  

The valuation of a tranche of a CDO is similarly dependent on default correlation. If. the correlation is low, the junior equity tranche is very risky and the senior tranches are. very safe. As the default correlation increases, the junior tranches become less risky and. the senior tranches become more risky. In the limit where the default correlation is perfect and the recovery rate is zero, the tranches are equally risky..  
