---
tags:
  - fnma
  - mbs
  - mortgage_pools
  - prepayments
  - wac
aliases:
  - FNMA Pools
  - MBS
  - Mortgage Pool
key_concepts:
  - Coupon and WAC
  - MBS characteristics
  - Mortgage pool definition
  - Prepayment rates
  - WAM and WALA
---

# 15.5 MORTGAGE POOLS  

The simplest form of an MBS is a mortgage pool, which is a portfolio of individual mortgages through which payments of interest and principal are passed from borrowers to investors. Borrowers make payments by the first of each month, which servicers pay to investors on the 25th of each month, or on the first business day thereafter.8  

Table 15.5 presents descriptive statistics as of December 2021 for three. 30-year FNMA pools, that is, portfolios of mortgages with approximately  

30 years to maturity securitized by FNMA. Consider first the two pools, CA2797 and MA3538, which were both issued in November 2018 and mature 30 years and one month later, in December 2048. Metrics in the table can be shown as "current," that is, as of the report date, in this case December 2021, or as "original," that is, as of the issue date, in this case, November 1, 2018. The table shows the WAM or weighted-average maturity of the loans in the pool and the WALA or weighted-average loan age, where each loan is weighted by its balance or principal outstanding as a percentage of total pool balance. In the simplest possible case, every loan in a pool would mature in exactly 30 years or 360 months as of the date of issue - giving an original pool WAM of 360 and WALA of zero - and, as of the report date, 37 months later, a current WAM of. $360-37=323$ and WALA of 37. Reality is more complex, however, because 30-year pools may be issued containing mortgages ranging in maturity from 181 to 361 months, and many mortgages prepay and drop out of pools between the issue and report dates.'  

The next row of Table 15.5 gives the coupons of the CA2797 and MA3538 pools as $4.5\%$ and $5.0\%$ respectively. The coupon of a pool. is the mortgage rate paid to investors. As a pass-through security, pool interest from the borrowers is paid to the investors, but only after subtracting a guarantee fee or g-fee for the insurer, in this case FNMA, and a servicing fee for the servicer. The next row in the table, gives the WAC, or. weighted-average mortgage rate of the loans in the pool. As of the issue. date, the WAC of CA2797 was $4.924\%$ , leaving 42.4 basis points worth of fees above the $4.500\%$ coupon paid to investors. The acronym WAC stands,. for "weighted-average coupon" and is unfortunate: the word "coupon" most often refers to the rate on a pool paid to investors, while WAC, as just mentioned, is a weighted average of the rates on the underlying loans. In any case, the current WAC of CA2797, at $4.198\%$ , is marginally lower than the original WAC, which means that, on average, loans with marginally higher rates prepaid faster between the issue and report dates. For MA3538, however, the original WAC is slightly less than the current WAC, which means that loans with marginally lower rates prepaid faster..  

The next section of Table 15.5 describes the principal amount of the. pools, their underlying loans, and experienced prepayments. At issue,  

TABLE 15.5Descriptive Statistics for Three 30-Year FNMA Pools, as of December 2021.   


<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">CA2797</td><td colspan="2">MA3538</td><td colspan="2">AI4813</td></tr><tr><td>Pool</td><td>Current</td><td> Original</td><td>Current</td><td>Original</td><td>Current</td><td>Original</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Payment Terms</td></tr><tr><td>Issued</td><td colspan="2">11/1/2018</td><td colspan="2">11/1/2018</td><td colspan="2">6/1/2011</td></tr><tr><td>Maturity</td><td colspan="2">12/1/2048</td><td colspan="2">12/1/2048 359</td><td colspan="2">6/1/2041 359</td></tr><tr><td>WAM (months)</td><td colspan="2">314</td><td colspan="2">319</td><td colspan="2">214</td></tr><tr><td>WALA (months)</td><td colspan="2">37</td><td colspan="2">37</td><td colspan="2">126</td></tr><tr><td>Coupon (%) WAC (%)</td><td colspan="2">4.500</td><td colspan="2">5.000</td><td colspan="2">4.500</td></tr><tr><td>4.918</td><td colspan="2">4.924</td><td colspan="2">5.772</td><td colspan="2">4.935</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Loans and Prepayments</td></tr><tr><td>Amount ($mm) Number</td><td>43.654 339</td><td>130.995</td><td>105.011</td><td>594.633 2,050</td><td>29.374 311</td><td>266.801 2,037</td></tr><tr><td>Avg. Size ($) 1mo CPR (%)</td><td>128,773 24.6</td><td>943 138,913</td><td>422 248,841 46.9</td><td>290,065</td><td>94,451 21.9</td><td>130,977</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Credit Quality</td></tr><tr><td>WAOCS</td><td colspan="2">740</td><td colspan="2">678</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>SATO (bps)</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>WAOLTV (%)</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">79 Additional Statistics</td></tr><tr><td>Own/2nd/Inv (%)</td><td colspan="2">91/6/3</td><td colspan="2">86/3/11</td><td colspan="2">86/9/5</td></tr><tr><td>Buy/Refi (%)</td><td colspan="2">75/25</td><td colspan="2">42/58</td><td colspan="2">53/47</td></tr><tr><td>R/C/B (%)</td><td colspan="2">63/25/13</td><td colspan="2">42/46/12</td><td colspan="2">38/58/4</td></tr><tr><td>State (%UPB)</td><td colspan="2">TX: 9.0</td><td colspan="2">CA: 20.6</td><td colspan="2">CA 10.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">FL: 8.7</td><td colspan="2">TX:13.5</td><td colspan="2">TX 10.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">PA: 6.5</td><td colspan="2">FL:13.4</td><td colspan="2">FL 6.4</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Pricing</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="5"></td><td>110.309</td></tr><tr><td>Price OAS</td><td colspan="2">109.783 90.1</td><td colspan="2">108.963 113.0</td><td colspan="2">86.5</td></tr><tr><td>OAD</td><td colspan="2">3.98</td><td colspan="2">3.18</td><td colspan="2">4.26</td></tr></table></body></html>

WAM: weighted-average maturity; WALA: weighted-average loan age; WAC: weighted average coupon; CPR: conditional prepayment rate; WAOCS: weighted-. average original credit score; SATO: spread at origination; WAOLTV: weightedaverage original loan-to-value ratio; Own/2nd/Inv: owner-occupied, second home, investment property; R/C/B: retail, correspondent, broker; UPB: unpaid balance..  

CA2797 had 943 loans at an average size or loan principal amount of. $\$138,913$ , for a total pool balance of about. $\$131$ million. As of the report date, the number of loans had fallen to 339, and the pool balance to about $\$44$ million. These numbers reveal a significant rate of prepayment. Using the formulae presented earlier, a $\$100,000$ 0-year mortgage at a rate of $5\%$ amortizes down to an outstanding balance after 37 months of. $\$95,204$ This scheduled amortization can be summarized with a factor, or remaining. fraction of original principal, of. $\$95,204/\$100,000$ or 0.952. The factor of CA2797 after 37 months, however, is $\$43.654/\$130.995$ or 0.333. That CA2797 prepaid heavily is not particularly surprising, as mortgage rates. fell significantly between November 2018 and December 2021. That the average loan size fell from. $\$138,913$ to $\$123,773$ indicates that larger loans prepaid more rapidly than smaller loans. This aspect of prepayments is accepted as broadly applicable: homeowners with larger loan amounts are,. on average, wealthier and more financially sophisticated and, therefore,. more able to take advantage of refinancing opportunities..  

The MA3538 pool could reasonably be expected to prepay faster than CA2797. First, the loans underlying MA3538 have higher loans rates, which - subject to a caveat discussed next - increase the incentive to refinance. Second, the average loan size of MA3538 is much higher and, as just mentioned, larger loans tend to prepay faster. And, indeed, MA3538 has prepaid much faster. Its factor of $\$105.011/\$594.633$ or 0.177 is a lot lower than the 0.333 factor of CA2797.  

The next row of the table gives the CPR, the conditional prepayment rate or the constant prepayment rate, over the most recent month. CPR is. an annualized measure of the speed of prepayments, which is intricately related to another measure, the SMM or single monthly mortality rate. Define $S M M_{n}$ as the percentage of principal outstanding that is prepaid during month $_n$ . Note that prepaid principal does not include scheduled or amortized principal payments, like those described in Table 15.4. CPR then annualizes SMM by assuming that SMM is constant over the year. Under that assumption, the principal not prepaid over one month is $1-S M M_{n}$ principal not repaid over 12 months is $(1-S M M_{n})^{12}$ , and prepayments over 12 months are given by,  

$$
{\cal C P R}_{n}=1-(1-{\cal S M M}_{n})^{12}
$$  

While CPR is an annualized rate, it is reported monthly based on the prepayments during that month. For example, if a pool prepaid $2\%$ of its outstanding principal above its amortizing principal in a given month, it is prepaying at an annualized speed or CPR given by Equation (15.5), that is, $21.53\%$ CPR is less than 12 times the monthly rate of $2\%$ , or $24\%$ , because of the compounding in Equation (15.5): the amount remaining each month is not $98\%$ of the original principal balance, but only of the principal balance after some number of months of prepayments. A CPR can be computed over several months as well. Say, for example, that the SMMs for a particular pool over three months were $2\%$ $2.5\%$ , and $3\%$ . Then the CPR of that pool over. that three-month period is,.  

$$
1-[(1-2\%)(1-2.5\%)(1-3\%)]^{4}=26.21\%
$$  

where raising the product of the three monthly survival rates to the fourth power gives the annual survival rate. Finally, then, returning to Table 15.5, the most recent monthly CPR of MA3538, at $46.9\%$ , is much greater than the $24.6\%$ CPR of CA2797.  

The next three rows of the table relate to pool credit quality. The first,. WAOCS (weighted-average original credit score), gives the weighted-average credit or FICO scores of the borrowers with loans in the pool. The second, SATO or spread at origination, gives the weighted-average spread of the loan rates over a mortgage index rate at the time of origination. By. these two metrics, the loans in MA3538 are significantly less creditworthy than those in CA2797. In fact, the 84.4-basis-point difference between the original WACs of the pools is approximately equal to the 84-basis-point difference in their SATOs. This, then, is the caveat in attributing faster prepayments of MA3538 to its higher coupon rate. Because that higher coupon is most likely due to inferior credit, refinancing the loans in MA3538 will likely require a higher rate as well, meaning that the incentive to refinance -- which is closely related to the difference between the existing mortgage rate and the available refinancing rate - may not be much greater for MA3538 than for CA2797. Furthermore, lower credit loans are thought to prepay relatively slowly, because homeowners with lower credits might find it more difficult to obtain refinancing loans. In any case, with respect to the other metric of loan quality, WAOLTV (weighted-average original LTV), the two pools are quite similar, at. $79\%$ and $80\%$  

The next several rows of Table 15.5 report a selection of additional pool statistics. These and other statistics, not shown here, are studied in great detail by market participants in an attempt to determine the speed at which a pool will prepay. The first row of this section of the table gives the percentages of loans for owner-occupied homes, for second homes, and for investment properties. The second gives the percentage of loans used to purchase the home and the percentage used to refinance. The third gives the percentages in each of origination channels described earlier, and the fourth gives the largest percentages of unpaid balance by state. Exactly how these statistics predict prepayments is part of the art of prepayment modeling, but some broad outlines are described here. Rates on loans for investment properties are typically higher than for owner-occupied properties, reflecting the greater propensity of investors to walk away from distressed situations. Across mortgages with the same coupon, therefore, investor prop-. erties, which have to be refinanced at relatively high rates, face a lower refinancing incentive and, consequently, refinance at lower speeds. With respect. to turnover, however, investor properties prepay relatively fast: investors are on the lookout for opportunities to sell properties at a profit, and they do. not bear the costs of changing residences to do so. Loans for the purpose of. refinancing might prepay faster, because homeowners who have refinanced already might have greater propensity to do so. Brokered originations might. refinance faster, because, with no stake in the servicing fees, that is, with no losses from extinguishing existing mortgages, brokers might have the greatest incentive to generate new refinancing originations. This effect is countered, however, by the efforts of originators, mentioned earlier, to recap-. ture refinancings. Finally, loans in some states seem to prepay faster than. others, controlling for the other effects discussed so far. These differences across states are usually attributed to differences in the costs of closing mortgages, which are composed of various taxes and fees. For example, average closing costs in New York are among the highest, and prepayments there are particularly slow, while average closing costs in California are relatively low and prepayment speeds there are particularly fast..  
