---
tags:
  - fda_approval
  - fleximat
  - generic_drugs
  - medfield_pharmaceuticals
  - patent_life
aliases:
  - Fleximat Strategies
  - Medfield Case
  - Susan Johnson
key_concepts:
  - Generic drug competition
  - Marketing effort launch
  - Medfield's flagship product
  - Patent life extension
  - Pharmaceutical industry crossroads
---

# HBS CASE MEDFIELD [[Week 5 Pharmaceuticals and Intangibles in Valuation|pharmaceuticals]]
## MEDFIELD [[Week 5 Pharmaceuticals and Intangibles in Valuation|pharmaceuticals]]

Susan Johnson, founder and CEO of Medfield [[Week 5 Pharmaceuticals and Intangibles in Valuation|pharmaceuticals]], had planned to spend the first few weeks of 2011 sorting out conflicting recommendations for extending the patent life of the company's flagship product, Fleximat, which was scheduled to go off patent in two years. With only three other products in Medfield's lineup of medications, one of which had only just received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval, strategic management of the company's product pipeline was of paramount importance. But a recent $750 million offer to purchase the company had entirely shifted her focus. The offer was not a complete surprise. The pharmaceutical industry landscape had changed considerably since Johnson, formerly a research scientist, had founded Medfield 20 years earlier. Development costs were rising, patents were running out, and new breakthroughs seemed ever more difficult to obtain. The industry was now focused on mergers and acquisitions, restructuring, and other strategies for cost-cutting and survival. Smaller firms like Medfield were being gobbled up by the major players all the time. Companies with approved products or products in the later stages of development, such as Medfield, were especially likely targets. While she no longer owned a controlling interest in the firm and could not force a particular decision, Johnson recognized that as CEO, founder, and largest single investor, she would be expected to offer an opinion and that her opinion would be extremely influential. It was also clear that determining the value of the company, and therefore whether the offer was reasonable, would necessitate a careful review of the company's existing and potential future products, and no one understood these as well as Johnson. Of course, for Johnson, this was more than simply a financial decision. She believed strongly, as did other employees, particularly among the research staff, that Medfield was engaged in work that was important, and she took great pride in the firm's accomplishments.

Medfield's corporate culture was explicitly oriented toward the end goal of improving patients' health, as evidenced by its slogan: "We Bring Wellness." This was an important value that Johnson had consciously and specifically built into the firm's culture. Both Johnson's parents were doctors and ran a small family-oriented practice that they had taken over from Johnson's maternal grandfather in the town where Johnson was raised. The idea of bettering lives through medicine was one Johnson had grown up with.

### CURRENT PRODUCT LINES

The company had experienced excellent growth over the years and in 2009 had 290
employees, total sales of $329 million (primarily in the United States), and a [[Operating Income vs. Net Income What's the Difference|Net Income]] of
$58 million. See **Exhibit 1** and **Exhibit 2** for financial information. The company manufactured and sold three primary drugs; all but one had substantial patent life remaining. Two were for pain management and the third was for auto-immune diseases. A fourth drug, also for pain management, had been approved and was ready for distribution. Due to its strong marketing and sales force, Medfield enjoyed an excellent reputation with both physicians and hospitals. The company's leading seller—responsible for 64% of its revenues—was Fleximat.

Fleximat was a drug used to treat pain and swelling in patients with ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis, and Crohn's disease, an ongoing disorder that caused painful inflammation of the digestive tract. Fleximat had proved to be much more effective than competing sulfa-based drugs (such as sulfasalazine) in treating those patients—particularly juveniles—who had an inadequate response to conventional therapies for Crohn's disease. Fleximat, however, had only two years remaining on its patent. The other three products were as follows:

+ *Lodamadal* was an extended-release tablet for once-daily treatment of moderate to severe pain in patients requiring continuous, around-the-clock opioid therapy for an extended period of time. It was in the class of medications called opiate agonists, which worked by changing the way the body sensed pain. This drug accounted for 12% of Medfield's revenues. Lodamadal had five years remaining on its patent.
+ Orsamorph* was a morphine sulfate sustained-release tablet designed to treat more intense pain. This was a popular drug in hospitals and accounted for 24% of revenues. Orsamorph had fourteen years remaining on its patent.
+ *Reximet* treated acute migraines. Reximet, which would begin selling in 2012, was a single tablet containing sumatriptan succinate, a 5-HT 1B/1D agonist, and naproxen sodium, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. Reximet had proved effective in treating arthritis and joint pain. It would have a full twenty-year patent life.

## THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY

Globally, the pharmaceutical industry was a powerhouse, generating billions in revenues.

The U.S. pharmaceutical manufacturing industry, at the core of the global business, had historically enjoyed high profits. Yearly, from 1995 through 2002, it was the most profitable industry in the United States, and drug manufacturers had experienced three times more profitability than the median of all *Fortune* 500 companies in 2004.2 Drug companies made money by bringing "blockbuster" drugs to market, relying on the period during which they were protected by patent to make significant revenues and focusing on mass-market drugs that treated a wide variety of ailments. Traditional pharmaceutical companies, several of which had existed since the 19th century, discovered and created new drugs using organic chemistry and natural compounds, but biotechnology companies—which used gene-splicing to produce their drugs—
had been on the rise since the mid-1970s. These companies often created "orphan drugs" that focused on rare diseases affecting a small percentage of the population In 2009, the pharmaceutical industry had approximately 1,500 companies with combined annual revenues of $200 billion. At the top of the drug-company pile were Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly and Company, Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer, and Merck. More than 80% of pharmaceutical revenue was brought in by the 50 largest companies. But the pharmaceutical industry had found itself at a crossroads as the first decade of the
21st century wound down. With the economic downturn, impending health-care-reform legislation, and many drugs losing their patents, drug companies had to determine how best to boost their bottom line. Most alarming to many of the major pharmaceutical companies was the imminent expiration of patents; estimates were that from 2009 to 2016, losses from these expirations would benefit generics to the tune of $140 billion As a result, the large [[Week 5 [[Week 5 Pharmaceuticals and Intangibles in Valuation|pharmaceuticals]] and Intangibles in Valuation|[[Week 5 Pharmaceuticals and Intangibles in Valuation|pharmaceuticals]]]] were turning to various options to stay viable, including restructuring, cutting internal R&D, adding biologics building generic units, entering emerging markets, and looking at M&A. Many large companies were bulking up their products by buying or licensing drugs from other companies or acquiring smaller outfits.

New drug approvals had also taken a dive. In 2009, there were only 25 new drugs6 that received approval from the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at the FDA. In contrast, during the mid-1990s, more than twice that number had been approved. The cost of bringing a drug to market was high: The latest figure (2005) was $1.3 billion, as compared with $802 million in 2001, $300 million in 1991, and $100 million in 1979. In general, only 2 in 10 approved medicines recouped R&D costs. The pharmaceutical industry—particularly in the 1990s and in the first decade of the 21st century—had come under criticism both from the public and the government, not only for the high price of branded drugs, but also for some of its tactics and strategies. Various manufacturers were accused of, among other things, withholding data from the FDA; manipulating certain data to achieve specific results (as Merck was accused of doing with Vioxx); hiring physician opinion leaders at great cost to promote its products; lavishing gifts, meals, and other luxuries on physicians in an attempt to get them to prescribe a particular drug; and promoting drugs for offlabel use. Drug companies had become the whipping posts for practically everyone, from presidents to consumer activists to the general public.

## THE GENERIC EQUATION

U.S. patent policy gave drug manufacturers a 20-year protection from the date of the original patent (usually filed early in the research process), plus 14 years from the date of FDA approval. Once the patent expired, the medication was fair game and other companies could make generic forms of it. In the United States, the modern system of generics came into being in 1984, after passage of the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act (or the Hatch-Waxman Act), which significantly changed the pharmaceutical patent landscape. The legislation's purpose was to ensure that generics were more widely available and to ensure adequate incentives for investing in the development of new drugs. The act expedited the process of generics reaching the market by letting manufacturers file an abbreviated new drug application with the FDA. The act also granted concessions to the brand manufacturers, allowing them to increase the patent time. Generics were, on average, 50% to 75% cheaper than the branded drug, and in many cases, the price difference was much bigger. This disparity benefited consumers tremendously but had the opposite effect on name-brand pharmaceutical firms. Sales of blockbuster drugs could plunge 80% or more the first year after a generic competitor entered the market. In 2009, the generics' share of the market was 74%, compared with 49% in 2000. In 2008, generics manufacturers Teva [[Week 5 Pharmaceuticals and Intangibles in Valuation|pharmaceuticals]] and Mylan Laboratories topped the list of producers of dispensed prescriptions in the United States at 494.2 million and 307.7 million, respectively, beating out Pfizer and Merck Of that top ten, six were generics manufacturers. Generics received a big boost in 2006, when Wal-Mart pharmacies, primarily to fight mail-order pharmacies, began offering deeply discounted generic brands for a flat $4 per month. Other large chains with pharmacies (e.g., Kroger, Target, and Walgreens) jumped on the $4 generic bandwagon. The popularity of these programs led to still-deeper discounts and even some free medication over the following years. Wal-Mart offered 90-day supplies of some generic drugs for $10, and grocery chain Publix offered free generic antibiotics for up to 14 days. Competition was fierce among manufacturers of generic drugs, resulting in heavy discounting.

Given this change in the competitive landscape, toward the end of the first decade of the
21st century, many major pharmaceutical companies were branching out by producing generics, not only of their own brands but also those of other companies. This represented an attempt to introduce a subtle form of differentiation into the mostly cost-leader-focused generics market; brand-name companies that produced generics could charge slightly more for the promise of quality, as opposed to no-name generic producers, whose selling point was rock-bottom prices. Among others, Pfizer (with its generics division Greenstone), Schering-Plough (which created a generic subsidiary, Warrick [[Week 5 Pharmaceuticals and Intangibles in Valuation|pharmaceuticals]]), Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis, and GlaxoSmithKline were manufacturing copycat drugs from other companies; the latter two targeted non-U.S. markets. Obviously, independent generic manufacturers were not pleased with this practice.

## FLEXIMAT STRATEGIES

As Johnson considered the state of the industry and Medfield's specific situation, her attention increasingly focused on Fleximat—the firm's core product but biggest source of uncertainty. Aside from simply letting Fleximat's patent lapse and losing sales to the inevitable generic substitutes, Johnson knew the company had several possible alternative actions. Of these, Johnson believed four approaches stood out:

1. Launch a renewed marketing effort. This would include becoming more aggressive in Medfield's current tactics. Johnson was well aware of how successful AstraZeneca's commercials for Nexium had been, which featured apparently suicidal people standing on cliffs, desperate for heartburn relief, and diners at fancy restaurants (mis)hearing a waiter describe the gastric distress that would follow after they ate their meals.
2. Engage in evergreening tactics. This essentially would allow the firm to maintain the benefits of patents through aggressive litigation. For example, a manufacturer could "stockpile" patent protections by taking out many separate patents (each good for 20 years), legitimate or not, on various components or attributes of one of its products. Components covered could include the color of the medication, a particular chemical reaction when the drug is taken and metabolized, or dose amounts. The firm would then defend these with legal actions that would impede the development and sale of generics.
3. Manufacture the generic form of Fleximat in-house. Medfield could also partner with a large generic manufacturer. This would be the easiest approach and would lead to the widest use of Fleximat by patients, but it would generate little in the way of financial benefits to the firm.
4. Reformulate Fleximat. This was the practice of "reinventing" a drug to "improve" it and thus stave off the generics. It meant reconfiguring the medication so it was different enough for FDA approval and a new patent, although this often could be done without substantially changing the medication itself. Methods to extend the patent life of the compound could include slightly changing the formulation, dosage, or labeling. Of these four alternatives, reformulation struck Johnson as likely the most beneficial to  Medfield; however, there were notable risks.

The most famous reformulation controversy had been the case of AstraZeneca's Nexium (a.k.a. "the purple pill"). AstraZeneca (AZ) released the patented heartburn drug Prilosec in 1981. It was one of the company's biggest blockbuster drugs. As patent expiration loomed, AZ got FDA approval in February 2001 for the reformulation of Prilosec into a newly patented drug called Nexium, also a heartburn prescription and very similar to Prilosec. AZ then ceased promoting Prilosec and began aggressively pushing Nexium. Two years later, the FDA approved an over-the-counter (OTC) version of Prilosec, which had exclusivity in the OTC market until 2006. As a result of this reformulation, Walgreen Company sued AstraZeneca for antitrust violations, claiming the pharmaceutical company had deliberately switched "the market from its heartburn prescription drug Prilosec just as that patent was about to expire to its newly approved drug Nexium, which had a fresh patent."8 Walgreen's lawsuit alleged that AZ manipulated the market, taking the emphasis off Prilosec, which had generic competition, and placing it on Nexium, which had a patent until 2014 and no generic competition, and that in doing so, the company eliminated choices for patients. Furthermore, Walgreen argued that there was little difference between Prilosec and Nexium and that AZ's switching of them was exclusionary and violated the Sherman Antitrust Act. Walgreen also claimed that AZ was guilty of further exclusionary action when it introduced the OTC version of Prilosec and received a three-year exclusivity grant from the FDA.

Ultimately, all five complaints in the lawsuit were dismissed for "failure to state a claim,"
and the federal district court judge asserted, among other things, that instead of having taken away drug choices, as Walgreen claimed, AZ had created additional choices (Prilosec OTC and Nexium). The court also made the point that antitrust laws do not evaluate the quality of a particular drug—whether superior or inferior; new products could only affect the market share if customers preferred them. Finally, the court did not find that AZ had interfered with Walgreen's freedom to compete; in other words, the court found that AZ was not guilty of illegal antitrust activity. While there was only one study that demonstrated superiority of Nexium, it had been sponsored by AstraZeneca Nevertheless, while not considered racketeering in the courts, the process of reformulation came under increasing public scrutiny. According to author Malcolm Gladwell, Nexium had become a "symbol of everything that is wrong with the pharmaceutical industry":

The big drug companies justify the high prices they charge—and the extraordinary profits they enjoy—by arguing that the search for innovative, lifesaving medicines is risky and expensive. But Nexium is little more than a repackaged version of an old medicine. And the hundred and twenty dollars a month that AstraZeneca charges isn't to recoup the costs of risky research and development; the costs were for a series of clinical trials that told us nothing we needed to know, and a half-billion-dollar marketing campaign selling the solution to a problem we'd already solved Furthermore, in a front-page article that first revealed AZ's initiative to reformulate its expiring medication, the *Wall Street Journal* concluded that "the Prilosec pattern, repeated across the pharmaceutical industry, goes a long way to explain why the nation's prescription drug bill is rising an estimated 17% a year even as general inflation is quiescent
The Value of Medfield

As Johnson sat down to contemplate the acquisition offer, she began to look at the company's portfolio of drugs in a new light. Rather than therapies for ailments, they were sources of cash flow. Fortunately, whereas the R&D process was notoriously unpredictable, once a product was approved, the future was relatively clear. This future could be summarized as follows:

+ For 20 years, the product would be patent-protected, and from the initial sales level, sales would grow at about 2% a year. When the patent expired, sales would decline 50% in each of the following three years and then would have effectively negligible sales in the fourth year.
+ The direct cost of sales would be 23%.
+ Direct marketing costs were 27% of revenue and Medfield typically spent 19% of revenue on future R&D.
+ The company estimated other general and administrative expenses would be about 4% of sales. A large portion of this expense category was tied directly or indirectly to sales and little of the cost was reasonably classified as fixed.
+ Capital expenditures were typically close to depreciation levels so that net changes in plant and equipment associated with a given product could be ignored. Similarly, net working capital tended to be very small and could be ignored.
+ The marginal tax rate for the firm was 32% and Johnson estimated that 8.5% was a reasonable discount rate (costof capital) for this industry.

Johnson had recently requested a forecast of the firm's financials based on approved products. This forecast (**Exhibit 4**) included a forecast for Reximet starting with initial sales of $80 million. This forecast was generated largely as a tool for examining the prospects associated with products already in existence and to allow her to gauge the possible impact of Fleximat going off patent. Clearly, the forecast did not include the operating effects of adding new products to the lineup. While generated for an alternate purpose, the forecast was built from the assumptions listed above, and Johnson wondered if this forecast could also form a reasonable basis for valuing the company. As Johnson contemplated her analysis, she immediately recognized that she needed to reach some decision regarding extending the patent life of Fleximat. The simplest and most obvious approach was to reformulate the drug. Her research team was reasonably certain that if it focused its efforts on changing the shape of the pill and applying an easier-to-swallow coating, a reformulation push in 2011 and 2012 at a cost of $35 million a year would likely generate a suitable reformulation. This reformulation would very likely leave the pharmacology of the medication unchanged. Of course, getting users to opt for the reformulation would require a strong marketing campaign above what was typical. She estimated the firm would have to spend $25 million annually for five years starting in 2011 (the first year getting the market ready for the reformulation) to ensure the success of the reformulation. A reformulation would not, of course, prevent some erosion in sales. Johnson estimated that when the patent expired in 2013, the drug would still see a 50% decline in sales, but after that, sales would grow at 2% a year for eight years. After that eight-year period, she reasonably expected that sales would dissipate in a manner similar to drugs going off patent (three years of 50% declines before dissipating entirely).

## BIG DECISIONS

Johnson had started the company with a simple mission: to find and develop medicines that would make lives better. Fleximat, she knew, had brought untold relief to children suffering from Crohn's disease, and this was particularly important to her because her nephew had Crohn's disease and Johnson had witnessed the incurable, chronic disease firsthand. For this reason, she wondered how the potential sale of the company might transform Medfield. The focus on making lives better, she hoped, would remain unchanged since the effectiveness of Medfield's drugs was the core source of its demand. She also expected the research staff and structures would be only slightly altered given that the team she had put together was quite effective; whereas a typical firm might have to spend $50 million for five years to develop a new product such as Reximet, her team could probably do it for $35 million a year It was clear to Johnson that this offer was a great opportunity for her to exit the business on a high note. Given that Medfield was about to roll out Reximet and that it had two other products with substantial patent lives remaining, the company was a good catch for a potential buyer. Johnson also realized that the state of early-stage product development at Medfield was quite weak at the time. None of its new products was in late-stage trials. The fact was that the offer would leave her extremely wealthy and it would afford her a graceful exit from her venture. Of course, in deference to the many other owners, she had to put aside her own cares and evaluate the offer in the spirit of a financial transaction. This was a big decision—likely the largest of her life.

[Week 5 Accounting RecapR&D, Intangibles, M&A & Goodwill](Week%205%20Accounting%20Recap-%20R&D,%20Intangibles,%20M&A%20&%20Goodwill.md)
[HBS CaseMedfield Pharmaceuticals](HBS%20Case-%20Medfield%20Pharmaceuticals.md)
[PSET 5Pharmaceuticals And Intangibles In Valuation](PSET%205-%20Pharmaceuticals%20And%20Intangibles%20In%20Valuation.md)