# 20.4  ALTERNATIVE WAYS OF CHARACTERIZING THE VOLATILITY SMILE  

There are a number of ways of characterizing the volatility smile. Sometimes it is shown as the relationship between implied volatility and strike price K. However, this relationship depends on the price of the asset. As the price of the asset increases (decreases), the central at-the-money strike price increases (decreases) so that the curve relating the implied volatility to the strike price moves to right (left).4 For this reason the implied volatility is often plotted as a function of the strike price divided by the current asset price, $K/S_{0}$ This is what we have done Figures 20.1 and 20.3.  

A refinement of this is to calculate the volatility smile as the relationship between the implied volatility and $K/F_{0}$ , where $F_{0}$ is the forward price of the asset for a contract. maturing at the same time as the options that are considered. Traders also often define an "at-the-money" option as an option where. $K=F_{0}$ , not as an option where $K=S_{0}$ The argument for this is that $F_{0}$ , not $S_{0}$ , is the expected stock price on the option's. maturity date in a risk-neutral world..  

Yet another approach to defining the volatility smile is as the relationship between the. implied volatility and the delta of the option (where delta is defined as in Chapter 19). This approach sometimes makes it possible to apply volatility smiles to options other. than European and American calls and puts. When the approach is used, an at-the-. money option is then defined as a call option with a delta of 0.5 or a put option with a delta of $-0.5$ These are referred to as \*"50-delta options.".  
