# 32.5 SOME TERMINOLOGY CONFUSION

Some foreign currency option traders do not like the terminology put and call. They see every option as being both a put and a call. Hence, it is common in foreign currency option transactions to use slightly different terminology than in other types of options. Foreign currency options, thus, are often written with two values referred to as the call currency amount and the put currency amount. As with any option, the holder of the option makes the exercise decision. If they choose to exercise, they tender the put currency amount and receive the call currency amount.6 As an example, suppose an option written on the pound designates the call currency amount as $\pm10,000,000$ and the put currency amount as. $\$15,000,000$ At expiration, if the exchange rate is higher than $\$1.50$ , the holder. of the option tenders (puts) $\$15,000,000$ to the writer and claims (calls) 10,000,000. With the exchange rate higher than $\$1.50$ , the option holder can exchange the $\pm10,000,000$ and receive more than $\$15,000,000$

In addition, there is a further matter in the world of currencies that causes some confusion. It involves the use of ratios in expressing exchange rates. It can be quite confusing.

Consider an ordinary ratio, say $3/8.$ In elementary math, this ratio is easily interpreted.. We mentally consider an object divided into eighths in which we reference three of those eighths. For example, we might bake a cake and cut it into eight pieces. Suppose we have three guests and we give each a piece. We have just used up three-eighths of the cake. Ratios can be easily multiplied. For example,. $(2/3)(1/5)=2/15$ .When we express the price of milk, we frequently say something like. $\$3.00$ a gallon. This can be written as $\$3/\mathrm{gal}$ . where the / is interpreted as per. We say that $\$3$ is the price per gallon of milk. These certainly. seem like simple concepts.

In the currency world, we can do a similar operation. We can indicate the ratio USD/ EUR. In conformance with the notion that this is a ratio, / is interpreted as per and we read that ratio as "the number of dollars per euro." Thus, if. $\mathrm{USD/EUR}=\$1.30$ we say that one euro costs $\$1.30$

As it turns out, however, the currency world does just the opposite. The notation USD/ EUR means "the number of euros per US dollar." The first term (before the slash) is the base currency and the second term (after the slash) is the quote currency. The multiplication works just the same and is just as valid. For example, using the dollar (UsD), euro (EUR), and Japanese yen (JPY), we have. $(U S D/E U R)*(E U R/J P Y)=U S D/J P Y.$ This is read as euros per dollar times yen per euro equals yen per dollar, which is $U S D/J P Y$ in the industry's notation. This notational form is standard practice but does appear reversed. If it were not, we could write the price of milk as gal. $/\$3$ , which we would never do. Thus,. you should be aware of this format..

So, in short, if the euro costs $\$1.30$ , it would be written as $E U R/U S D=1.30$
