# 2.1 BACKGROUND  

Examples of large futures exchanges are the CME Group (www.cmegroup.com), the Intercontinental Exchange (www.theice.com), Eurex (www.eurexchange.com), B3,. Brazil (www.b3.com.br), the National Stock Exchange of India (www.nse-india .com), the China Financial Futures Exchange (www.cffex.com.cn), and the Tokyo. Financial Exchange (www.tfx.co.jp). (See the table at the end of this book for a more. complete list.)  

We examine how a futures contract comes into existence by considering the corn futures contract traded by the CME Group. On June 5, a trader in New York might call a broker with instructions to buy 5,000 bushels of corn for delivery in September of the same year. The broker would immediately issue instructions to a trader to buy (i.e., take a long position in) one September corn contract. (Each corn contract is for the delivery of exactly 5,000 bushels.) At about the same time, another trader in Kansas might instruct a broker to sell 5,o0o bushels of corn for September delivery. This broker. would then issue instructions to sell (i.e., take a short position in) one corn contract. A price would be determined and the deal would be done. Under the traditional open outcry system, floor traders representing each party would physically meet to determine the price. With electronic trading, a computer matches the traders..  

# Business Snapshot 2.1 The Unanticipated Delivery of a Futures Contract  

This story (which may well be apocryphal) was told to the author of this book a long. time ago by a senior executive of a financial institution. It concerns a new employee. of the financial institution who had not previously worked in the financial sector. One of the clients of the financial institution regularly entered into a long futures. contract on live cattle for hedging purposes and issued instructions to close out the. position on the last day of trading. (Live cattle futures contracts are traded by the CME Group and each contract is on 40,000 pounds of cattle.) The new employee was given responsibility for handling the account..  

When the time came to close out a contract the employee noted that the client was long one contract and instructed a trader at the exchange to buy (not sell) one contract. The result of this mistake was that the financial institution ended up with a long position in two live cattle futures contracts. By the time the mistake was spotted trading in the contract had ceased.  

The financial institution (not the client) was responsible for the mistake. As a result, it started to look into the details of the delivery arrangements for live cattle futures contracts-something it had never done before. Under the terms of the contract, cattle could be delivered by the party with the short position to a number of different locations in the United States during the delivery month. Because it was long, the financial institution could do nothing but wait for a party with a short position to issue a notice of intention to deliver to the exchange and for the exchange. to assign that notice to the financial institution..  

It eventually received a notice from the exchange and found that it would receive live cattle at a location 2,000 miles away the following Tuesday. The new employee. was sent to the location to handle things. It turned out that the location had a cattle auction every Tuesday. The party with the short position that was making delivery. bought cattle at the auction and then immediately delivered them. Unfortunately the cattle could not be resold until the next cattle auction the following Tuesday. The employee was therefore faced with the problem of making arrangements for the cattle. to be housed and fed for a week. This was a great start to a first job in the financial. sector!  

The trader in New York who agreed to buy has a long futures position in one contract; the trader in Kansas who agreed to sell has a short futures position in one contract. The price agreed to is the current futures price for September corn, say 600 cents per bushel. This price, like any other price, is determined by the laws of supply and demand. If, at a particular time, more traders wish to sell rather than buy September corn, the price will go down. New buyers then enter the market so that a balance between buyers and sellers is maintained. If more traders wish to buy rather than sell September corn, the price goes up. New sellers then enter the market and a balance between buyers and sellers is maintained.  

# Closing Out Positions  

The vast majority of futures contracts do not lead to delivery. The reason is that most traders choose to close out their positions prior to the delivery period specified in the contract. Closing out a position means entering into the opposite trade to the original one. For example, the New York trader who bought a September corn futures contract on June 5 can close out the position by selling (i.e., shorting) one September corn futures contract on, say, July 20. The Kansas trader who sold (i.e., shorted) a September contract. on June 5 can close out the position by buying one September contract on, say,. August 25. In each case, the trader's total gain or loss is determined by the change in. the futures price between June 5 and the day when the contract is closed out..  

Delivery is so unusual that traders sometimes forget how the delivery process works. (see Business Snapshot 2.1). Nevertheless, we will review delivery procedures later in. this chapter. This is because it is the possibility of final delivery that ties the futures price to the spot price.'  
