# 2.7 DELIVERY  

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, very few of the futures contracts that are entered. into lead to delivery of the underlying asset. Most are closed out early. Nevertheless, it is the possibility of eventual delivery that determines the futures price. An under-. standing of delivery procedures is therefore important..  

The period during which delivery can be made is defined by the exchange and varies from contract to contract. The decision on when to deliver is made by the party with the short position, whom we shall refer to as trader A. When trader A decides to deliver, trader A's broker issues a notice of intention to deliver to the exchange clearing house. This notice states how many contracts will be delivered and, in the case of commodities, also specifies where delivery will be made and what grade will be delivered. The exchange then chooses a party with a long position to accept delivery.  

Suppose that the party on the other side of trader A's futures contract when it was. entered into was trader B. It is important to realize that there is no reason to expect that it will be trader B who takes delivery. Trader B may well have closed out his or her position by trading with trader C, trader C may have closed out his or her position by trading with trader D, and so on. The usual rule chosen by the exchange is to pass the notice of intention to deliver on to the party with the oldest outstanding long position. Parties with long positions must accept delivery notices. However, if the. notices are transferable, traders with long positions usually have a short period of. time to find another party with a long position that is prepared to take delivery in place of them.  

In the case of a commodity, taking delivery usually means accepting a warehouse. receipt in return for immediate payment. The party taking delivery is then responsible. for all warehousing costs. In the case of livestock futures, there may be costs associated. with feeding and looking after the animals (see Business Snapshot 2.1). In the case of financial futures, delivery is usually made by wire transfer. For all contracts, the price paid is usually the most recent settlement price. If specified by the exchange, this price is. adjusted for grade, location of delivery, and so on..  

There are three critical days for a contract. These are the first notice day, the last notice day, and the last trading day. The first notice day is the first day on which a notice of intention to make delivery can be submitted to the exchange. The last notice day is the last such day. The last trading day is generally a few days before the last notice day. To avoid the risk of having to take delivery, a trader with a long position should close out his or her contracts prior to the first notice day.  

# Cash Settlement  

Some financial futures, such as those on stock indices discussed in Chapter 3, are settled in cash because it is inconvenient or impossible to deliver the underlying asset. In the case of the futures contract on the S&P 500, for example, delivering the underlying asset. would involve delivering a portfolio of 500 stocks. When a contract is settled in cash, all. outstanding contracts are declared closed on a predetermined day. The final settlement price is set equal to the spot price of the underlying asset at either the open or close of trading on that day. For example, in the S&P 500 futures contract traded by the CME Group, the predetermined day is the third Friday of the delivery month and final settlement is at the opening price on that day..  
