---
tags:
  - '#clearing_house'
  - '#credit_risk'
  - '#daily_settlement'
  - '#futures_contracts'
  - '#initial_margin'
  - '#maintenance_margin'
  - '#margin_accounts'
  - '#margin_call'
  - '#variation_margin'
---
# 2.4 THE OPERATION OF MARGIN ACCOUNTS  

If two traders get in touch with each other directly and agree to trade an asset in the future for a certain price, there are obvious risks. One of the traders may regret the deal. and try to back out. Alternatively, the trader simply may not have the financial resources to honor the agreement. One of the key roles of the exchange is to organize. trading so that contract defaults are avoided. This is where margin accounts come in..  

# Daily Settlement  

To illustrate how margin accounts work, we consider a trader who buys (i.e., takes a. long position in) two December gold futures contracts. We suppose that the current. futures price is $\$1,750$ per ounce. Because the contract size is 100 ounces, the trader has. contracted to buy a total of 200 ounces at this price. The trader has to keep funds in. what is known as a margin account. The amount that must be deposited at the time the. contract is entered into is known as the initial margin. We suppose this is $\$6,000$ per contract, or $\$12,000$ in total. At the end of each trading day, the margin account is adjusted to reflect the trader's gain or loss. This practice is referred to as daily settlement or marking to market.  

Suppose, for example, that by the end of the first day the futures price has dropped by $\$9$ from $\$1,750$ to $\$1,741$ The trader has a loss of. $\$1,800$ , because the 200 ounces of December gold, which the trader contracted to buy at. $\$1,750$ , can now be sold for only $\$1,741$ . The balance in the margin account would therefore be reduced by. $\$1,800$ to $\$10,200$ . Similarly, if the price of December gold rose to. $\$1,759$ by the end of the first day, the balance in the margin account would be increased by $\$1,800$ to $\$123,800$ A trade is first settled at the close of the day on which it takes place. It is then settled at the close of trading on each subsequent day.  

Daily settlement leads to funds flowing each day between traders with long positions. and traders with short positions. If the futures price increases from one day to the next, funds flow from traders with short positions to traders with long positions. If the futures price decreases from one day to the next, funds flow in the opposite direction,. from traders with short positions to traders with long positions. This daily flow of funds between traders to reflect gains and losses is known as variation margin..  

Most individuals have to contact their brokers to trade. They are subject to what is. termed a maintenance margin. This is somewhat lower than the initial margin. If the balance in the margin account falls below the maintenance margin, the trader receives a margin call and is expected to top up the margin account to the initial margin level within. a short period of time. If the trader does not provide this variation margin, the broker. closes out the position. In the case of the trader considered earlier, closing out the position would involve neutralizing the existing contract by selling 200 ounces of gold for. delivery in December.  

If the trader's contract increases in value, the balance in the margin account increases. The trader is entitled to withdraw any balance in the margin account that is in excess of the initial margin.  

Table 2.1  Operation of margin account for a long position in two gold futures contracts. The initial margin is $\$6,000$ per contract, or $\$12,000$ in total; the. maintenance margin is $\$4,500$ per contract, or $\$9,000$ in total. The contract is entered into on Day 1 at $\$1,750$ and closed out on Day 16 at $\$1,726.90$   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Day</td><td>Trade price ($)</td><td>Settlement price ($)</td><td>Daily gain ($)</td><td>Cumulative gain ($)</td><td>Marginaccount balance ($)</td><td>Margin call ($)</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>1,750.00</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>12,000</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td>1,741.00</td><td>-1,800</td><td>-1,800</td><td>10,200</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td></td><td>1,738.30</td><td>-540</td><td>-2,340</td><td>9,660</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td></td><td>1,744.60</td><td>1,260</td><td>-1,080</td><td>10,920</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td></td><td>1,741.30</td><td>-660</td><td>-1,740</td><td>10,260</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td></td><td>1,740.10</td><td>-240</td><td>-1,980</td><td>10,020</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td></td><td>1,736.20</td><td>-780</td><td>-2,760</td><td>9,240</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td></td><td>1,729.90</td><td>-1,260</td><td>-4,020</td><td>7,980</td><td>4,020</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td></td><td>1,730.80</td><td>180</td><td>-3,840</td><td>12,180</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td></td><td>1,725.40</td><td>-1,080</td><td>-4,920</td><td>11,100</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td></td><td>1,728.10</td><td>540</td><td>-4,380</td><td>11,640</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td></td><td>1,711.00</td><td>-3,420</td><td>-7,800</td><td>8,220</td><td>3,780</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td></td><td>1,711.00</td><td>0</td><td>-7,800</td><td>12,000</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td></td><td>1,714.30</td><td>660</td><td>-7,140</td><td>12,660</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td></td><td>1,716.10</td><td>360</td><td>-6,780</td><td>13,020</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td></td><td>1,723.00</td><td>1,380</td><td>-5,400</td><td>14,400</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td>1,726.90</td><td></td><td>780</td><td>-4,620</td><td>15,180</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

Table 2.1 illustrates the operation of the margin account for one possible sequence of futures prices in the case of the trader considered earlier who buys two gold futures contracts. The maintenance margin is assumed to be $\$4,500$ per contract, or $\$9,000$ in total. On Day 7, the balance in the margin account falls. $\$1,020$ below the maintenance margin level. This drop triggers a margin call from the broker for an additional $\$4,020$ to bring the account balance up to the initial margin level of $\$12,000$ It is assumed that the trader provides this margin by the close of trading on Day 8. On Day 11, the balance in the margin account again falls below the maintenance margin level, and a margin call for $\$3,780$ is sent out. The trader provides this margin by the close of trading on Day 12. On Day 16, the trader decides to close out the position by selling two contracts. The futures price on that day is $\$1,726.90$ , and the trader has a cumulative loss of. $\$4,620$ . Note that. the trader has excess margin on Days 8, 13, 14, and 15. It is assumed that the excess is not withdrawn.  

Most brokers pay traders interest on the balance in a margin account. The balance in the account does not, therefore, represent a true cost, provided that the interest rate is competitive with what could be earned elsewhere. To satisfy the initial margin requirements, but not subsequent margin calls, a trader can usually deposit securities with the broker. Treasury bills are usually accepted in lieu of cash at about $90\%$ of their market value. Shares are also sometimes accepted in lieu of cash, but at about $50\%$ of their market value.  

Whereas a forward contract is settled at the end of its life, a futures contract is, as we have seen, settled daily. At the end of each day, the trader's gain (loss) is added to (subtracted from) the margin account, bringing the value of the contract back to zero. A futures contract is in effect closed out and rewritten at a new price each day.  

Minimum levels for the initial and maintenance margin are set by the exchange clearing house. Individual brokers may require greater margins from their clients than the minimum levels specified by the exchange clearing house. Minimum margin levels are determined by the variability of the price of the underlying asset and are revised when necessary. The higher the variability, the higher the margin levels. The maintenance margin is usually about $75\%$ of the initial margin.  

Note that margin requirements are the same on short futures positions as they are on. long futures positions. It is just as easy to take a short futures position as it is to take a long one. The spot market does not have this symmetry. Taking a long position in the. spot market involves buying the asset for immediate delivery and presents no problems.. Taking a short position involves selling an asset that you do not own. This is a more complex transaction that may or may not be possible in a particular market. It is. discussed further in Chapter 5.  

# The Clearing House and Its Members  

A clearing house acts as an intermediary in futures transactions. It guarantees the.   
performance of the parties to each transaction. The clearing house has a number of.   
members. Brokers who are not members themselves must channel their business through a member and post margin with the member. The main task of the clearing.   
house is to keep track of all the transactions that take place during a day, so that it can.   
calculate the net position of each of its members..  

The clearing house member is required to provide to the clearing house initial margin. (sometimes referred to as clearing margin) reflecting the total number of contracts that are being cleared. The maintenance margin is set equal to the initial margin. At the end of each day, the transactions being handled by the clearing house member are settled through the clearing house. If in total the transactions have lost money, the member is required to provide variation margin to the exchange clearing house equal to the loss;if there has been a gain on the transactions, the member receives variation margin from the clearing house equal to the gain. Intraday variation margin payments may also be required by a clearing house from its members in times of significant price volatility; if margin requirements are not met, a member is closed out.  

In determining margin requirements, the number of contracts outstanding is usually calculated on a net basis rather than a gross basis. This means that short positions the clearing house member is handling for clients are netted against long positions. Suppose, for example, that the clearing house member has two clients: one with a long position in 20 contracts, the other with a short position in 15 contracts. The initial margin would be calculated on the basis of five contracts. The calculation of the margin requirement is usually designed to ensure that the clearing house is about $99\%$ certain that the margin will be sufficient to cover any losses in the event. that the member defaults and has to be closed out. Clearing house members are required to contribute to a guaranty fund. This may be used by the clearing house in the event that a member defaults and the member's margin proves insufficient to cover losses.  

# Credit Risk  

The whole purpose of the margining system is to ensure that funds are available to pay. traders when they make a profit. Overall the system has been very successful. Traders entering into contracts at major exchanges have always had their contracts honored. Futures markets were tested on October 19, 1987, when the S&P 500 index declined by oVer $20\%$ and traders with long positions in S&P 500 futures found they had negative. margin balances with their brokers. Traders who did not meet margin calls were closed out but still owed their brokers money. Some did not pay and as a result some brokers went bankrupt because, without their clients' money, they were unable to meet margin calls on contracts they entered into on behalf of their clients. However, the clearing. houses had sufficient funds to ensure that everyone who had a short futures position on the S&P 500 got paid.  
