---
tags:
  - hedge_funds
  - passive_funds
  - replication
  - strategy_indexes
  - survivorship_bias
aliases:
  - Fund Replication
  - Hedge Fund Performance
  - Strategy Index Creation
key_concepts:
  - Hedge fund returns
  - High fees erosion
  - Lack of transparency
  - Replicating hedge fund strategies
  - Survivorship bias impact
---

# 12.3 HEDGE FUND REPLICATION AND STRATEGY INDEXES  

The oft-quoted statistics of superior returns of the hedge funds over traditional investments suffer from two related problems. First, the number of funds launched and liquidated each year is very large. Fung and Hsieh (2009) point out that when hedge funds migrate from one database to another, or databases are merged, performance has to be supplied for early years (backfill) or the fund has to be deleted (survivorship). In 2008 about 1,500 funds were liquidated and 500 launched; in 2009 about 1,000 were liquidated and more than 500 new ones launched. While the average return may be higher than a passive index strategy, extreme. positive and negative surprises abound. How would an investor know in advance which fund to choose to be at or above average? The survivorship bias implies that each year many failed funds are excluded from the average calculation. We have no way of knowing what the average would be if we could include failures. And what if the high fees charged by the funds eat away any alpha over time? Arnott and West (2008) explore the erosion of gross returns of funds of funds by fees (asset-based plus carry). Bollen and Pool (2009) find evidence that funds use discretion in valuing illiquid securities to temporarily overstate their returns. Bollen and Whaley (2009) show the errors produced trying to estimate alpha, when the benchmark constantly moves (shift in asset classes, strategies and leverage). Hedge fund investors have to face the lack of transparency, high net worth requirements, lack of liquidity, and being shut out of many funds with good records as they close to new investors. There are also questions about the persistence of hedge fund returns. Brown et al. (1999) found no evidence of year-to-year persistence when controlling for survivorship bias. Agarwal and Naik (2o00) found persistence in the 1982-98 period, attributing it to superior mutual fund managers opening new hedge. funds. Agarwal et al. (2009) further suggested that funds with generous managerial optionlike incentives and discretion delivered better performance. Yet, similar to mutual funds, large. size and fund inflows seem to negatively affect subsequent performance. Boyson (2009) finds strongest persistence in younger and smaller funds, as a group outperforming older, larger ones by over $10\%$ . Most surveys show that investors shrug off these questions; the surveys cite. high fees and illiquidity topping the concern list. Other research into hedge fund performance has also documented a very high correlation of their returns with passive index strategies (with the exception of some long/short and most inflation focused funds). Could it be that hedge. fund investors get no superior returns, get no benefits of diversification, and suffer high fees?  

A better question is whether hedge fund strategies can be replicated more cheaply. In the. last 3 years, a new industry has come to life: creation of strategy indexes and offering those. indexes in the form of cheap passive funds. "Passive' comes with a caveat: the replication. strategy may be very intense requiring ultrafrequent rebalancing, but it is algorithmic and. precisely defined by the index creator. The players in this business are Credit Suisse, State. Street Global Advisors and Goldman Sachs on the institutional/wealth management side, and IndexIQ, WisdomTree and AdvisorShares on the retail side. The business is slowly moving from the institutional space to retail. As of the end of 2010, a handful of ETFs are offering. passive hedge fund replication. A performance report found on IndexIq website (see Table 12.1) lists the indexes tracking the performance of "primitive strategy" indexes that have come to be known as "alternative beta' factors, as of November 2010..  

Table 12.1 IndexIQ hedge fund replication beta indexes   


<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1month3months</td><td>YTD</td><td>1 year</td><td>3 years</td></tr><tr><td>IQ Hedge Global MacroBeta IndexIQHGGMB</td><td>-2.18%</td><td>-2.73%</td><td>64.62%</td><td>60.68%</td><td>0.03%</td></tr><tr><td>IQ Hedge Long/Short Beta Index IQHGLSB</td><td>-2.80%</td><td>4.27%</td><td>7.22%</td><td>0.90%</td><td>-5.27%</td></tr><tr><td>IQ Hedge Event-DrivenBeta Index IQHGEDB</td><td>-1.03%</td><td>3.83%</td><td>9.62%</td><td>6.50%</td><td>3.38%</td></tr><tr><td>IQ HedgeN MarketNeutralBetaIndexIQHGMNB</td><td>-0.71%</td><td>1.16%</td><td>3.47%</td><td>1.61%</td><td>2.46%</td></tr><tr><td>IQ HedgeE EmergingMarketsBetaIndexIQHGEMB</td><td>-1.31%</td><td>5.71%</td><td>7.96%</td><td>6.46%</td><td>7.95%</td></tr><tr><td>IQ Hedge Fixed Income ArbitrageBeta IndexIQHGFIB</td><td>0.45%</td><td></td><td>3.22%5.56%</td><td>6.68%</td><td>2.64%</td></tr><tr><td>IQ Hedge Composite Beta Index IQHGCOB</td><td>-1.26%</td><td></td><td>2.57%5.35%3.87%</td><td></td><td>2.35%</td></tr></table></body></html>

Source: http://www.indexiq.com/media.html  

The same IndexIQ report lists the ETFs aimed at replicating specific hedge fund categories (see Table 12.2).  

Replication strategies are commonly classified into three groups: factor-based, rule-based, and distribution replication. Hasanhodzic and Lo (2007) is the first paper to test the linear factor-based replication models. They explain the serial correlation in hedge fund returns not with managers' investment acumen (alpha), but as extra reward for illiquidity (on top of standard beta models) that public market investors cannot gain exposure to. Sadka (2010) adds that the loading on the covariation with aggregate liquidity as a significant determinant of a fund's return, irrespective of the fund's strategy. Amenc et al. (20i0) test non-linear replication strategies. Their main findings are that non-linear and conditional models do not improve replication; choosing better economic factors does. However, the replication strategies systematically underperform the actual hedge funds. Brooks et al. (2007) shows how incentive fees obscure the true beta exposure of hedge funds. Net returns tend to understate beta exposure contribution by 60 bp per year. Replication should thus be based on gross returns.  

Fung and Hsieh (2007) review the rule-based replication. Fung and Hsieh (1997) identified five strategies as accounting for $45\%$ of the variation of hedge fund returns. They labeled them. "trend following" one and two, "value", "global/macro'", and "distressed securities". Fung and Hsieh (2001 and 2004) advanced the concepts of rule-based replication building blocks they. labeled "primitive trading strategies" applied to trend following, long-short equity, and credit arbitrage. Others added them for merger arbitrage, convertible arbitrage, and general equity and emerging markets funds. Thus diversified hedge fund portfolios could be described in terms of these "alternative beta" factors, the remainder being "alternative alpha". Jaeger (2008) estimates that with factor-based, rule-based and distributional replication, beta can account for up to $90\%$ of hedge fund returns. He reviews the entire spectrum of techniques. He and Roncalli and Weisang (2008) propose the core-satellite approach to overcoming the lack of access to the alpha of hedge funds. The approach stresses traditional long asset class allocation for the bulk of investment dollars, supplemented with satellite alpha-focused investments. There is another way to classify hedge fund replication techniques:  

Table 12.2 IndexIQ hedge fund replication ETFs   


<html><body><table><tr><td>FundName</td><td>Ticker</td><td>Category</td></tr><tr><td>IQ Alpha Hedge Strategy Fund</td><td>IQHIX,IQHOX</td><td>Long/Short</td></tr><tr><td>IQ Hedge Multi-Strategy Tracker</td><td>QAI</td><td>Multi-strategy</td></tr><tr><td>IQ GlobalResources</td><td>GRES</td><td>Globalresources</td></tr><tr><td>IQ MergerArbitrage</td><td>MNA</td><td>Merger arbitrage</td></tr><tr><td>IQ HedgeMacro Tracker</td><td>MCRO</td><td>Global Macro/Emerging Markets</td></tr><tr><td>IQ RealReturn</td><td>CPI</td><td>Realreturn/Inflation</td></tr></table></body></html>

Source: http://www.indexiq.com/media.html  

Regression models estimating factor loadings on traditional economic and alternative indexes   
Active formulaic replication of current fads  

The first is technically relatively simple. We pose a linear regression model of hedge fund. returns on a set of factors, look for significance of factors, and estimate factor loadings (betas). The main problem is that of factor identification. While this may seem impossible at first, a little bit of clever thinking leads in the following directions..  

Can other people's aggregate long/short selections be deduced from the exchange reported short interest as percentage of total float of a stock?.   
Can a put-to-call open interest ratio tell us anything? If so, we have a replication strategy..   
Is liquidity risk related to the change in the implied volatilities? If so, we gain exposure to it through volatility futures, options or swaps.. Can inflation be stripped out of nominal rate and real rate Treasuries? If so, we can create real rate of return vehicles. Can some merger activity be induced by the relative cost of financing, relative P/E within the industry, percentage premium offered in the tender, etc.? If so, perhaps it can be modeled.  

The second, harder, approach to hedge fund replication involves active research into the current trade ideas. If we can observe the clustering of the hedge fund positions and their flows, we can replicate their relative exposure to various factors without knowing the exact purpose of the strategy. Some strategy styles, such as market-neutral or merger-driven ones, may be impossible to replicate this way. In market-neutral strategies with close substitutes, the arbitrage is over a few basis points and the two substitutes may be difficult to distinguish by the replicator. In merger arbitrage, the replicator may simply always be too late to the game. However, many global macro and some credit arbitrage strategies take several weeks or months to establish and unwind, and the clustering of the trades may be easily detectable.  

Table 12.3 presents a sample of retail alternative investment and strategy index funds trading on US exchanges, or as mutual funds (five-letter ticker) in the USA, as of March 2011. They are in no particular order, just what could be found while scouring the press announcement of newly launched funds. The table contains the list and the size of the fund. Buyers beware!  

Table 12.3 Other alternative and hedge fund replication ETFs as of March 31, 2011   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Fundname</td><td>Ticker</td><td>Category</td><td>Size ($mil)</td></tr><tr><td>iSharesDiversifiedAlternative</td><td>ALT</td><td>Long/short multiasset</td><td>118</td></tr><tr><td>CreditSuisseLong/ShortLiquidETN</td><td>CSLS</td><td>Long/shortequityindex</td><td>25</td></tr><tr><td>PowerSharesNasdaq100BuyWrite</td><td>PQBW</td><td>Stock-coveredcall</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>GreenHaven Continuous Commodity</td><td>GCC</td><td>Longcommodityfutures</td><td>689</td></tr><tr><td>Claymore/Delta GlobalShipping</td><td>SEA</td><td>Shipping stock index</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td>WisdomTreeDreyfusEmergingCurrency</td><td>CEW</td><td>Em currencyMMbasket</td><td>380</td></tr><tr><td>CreditSuisseMerger Arbitrage Liquid IdxETN CSMA</td><td></td><td>Long/short merger</td><td>50</td></tr><tr><td>FrostDiversifiedStrategies</td><td>FDSFX</td><td>Fundoffundsindex+alternative</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>NatixisASGGlobalAlternatives*</td><td></td><td>GAFYX Long/short stock+ bond</td><td>731</td></tr></table></body></html>

\*Mutual funds; all others are ETFs.  

Table 12.4 Dow Jones Credit Suisse Hedge Fund Indexes   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Ticker</td><td>Currency</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Hedge Fund Index (USD)</td><td>CORHI</td><td>USD</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Hedge Fund Net Index (USD)</td><td>CORHIUSD</td><td>USD</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Hedge Fund Net Index EuroHedged</td><td>CORHIEUR</td><td>EUR</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Hedge Fund Net Index Swiss Franc Hedged</td><td>CORHICHF</td><td>CHF</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Hedge Fund Net Index Pound Sterling Hedged</td><td>CORHIGBP</td><td>GBP</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Hedge Fund Net Index Yen Hedged</td><td>CORHIJPY</td><td>JPY</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Convertible Arbitrage Hedge Fund Index (USD)</td><td>CORHICA</td><td>USD</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Emerging Markets Hedge Fund Index (USD)</td><td>CORHIEM</td><td>USD</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Event Driven Hedge Fund Index (USD)</td><td>CORHIED</td><td>USD</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Fixed Income Arbitrage Hedge Fund Index (USD)</td><td>CORHIFI</td><td>USD</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Global Macro Hedge Fund Index (USD)</td><td>CORHIGM</td><td>USD</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Long/Short Equity Hedge Fund Index (USD)</td><td>CORHILS</td><td>USD</td></tr><tr><td>Dow Jones Credit Suisse Core Managed Futures Hedge Fund Index (USD)</td><td>CORHIMF</td><td>USD</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Lastly, a lot of time in hedge fund replication, it is not clear what it is that we are trying to track? Specific fund or specific strategy? If it is the broad asset-weighted indexes of liquid, investable hedge funds, then, in April 2011, Dow Jones launched a series of Credit Suisse hedge fund indexes normalized to 100 as of 12/31/2010. Table 12.4 shows the list of the indexes, their tickers and currency of denomination.  

# 14  

# Private Equity, Pension, and Sovereign Funds.  

Like banks and insurance companies, pension funds and private equity firms play a very. important role in recycling excess savings back to business entities. Defined benefit pension funds invest the pension contributions they receive monthly into public and private markets in. order to be able to meet very large future pension liabilities. Sovereign funds and private equity funds seek public and private investments in order to maximize intermediate term returns. The common feature of these intermediaries is that they often seek returns not only from taking on systematic (general macroeconomic) risk of the public stock markets (like mutual funds or individual investors), but also rents earned on bearing illiquidity risk, corporate reorganizations, and distressed turnarounds. This by itself forces an intermediate 2- to 10-year horizon. Also, unlike most hedge funds, they use their capital, often enhanced with leverage or pooled with other contributors, to \*"invest' (buy and hold) rather than to support (margin) a relative value. arbitrage strategy. That is, they take long positions in companies and engage in providing important management services aimed at "unlocking value"' (reorganizing underperforming managements, demerging and selling off, guiding through the venture capital stages). This human capital injection is an important part of their strategy for success..  

Private equity firms do not aim to arbitrage generic asset classes against each other, US interest rate vs US stocks, or US interest rates vs Australian interest rates. The financial engineering and arbitrage here takes place at the corporate level and is individualized. Each. case is different. Some firms need the entrenched management to be removed, some need to. be split up, and some need production methods rationalized; early-stage venture firms have. product development strategies, but need corporate finance expertise. In short-term-obsessed public markets, these goals are often impossible to accomplish. Private equity firms serve. as organizing clusters. They form funds in which they invest their own capital, but invite pension funds, sovereign funds, investment companies, and "qualified' (wealthy) individuals to contribute the bulk of the capital. The purchased businesses are guided to success, or failure. The investments are sold off, funds liquidated, and the capital is returned to all the contributors. The process takes up to 10 years.  

The objective of the chapter is to overview this investment process and its quantification language. We start at the private equity firm level: the formation of the limited partnership fund, the investments in a leverage buyout or a venture start-up, and the exit strategy through an IPO or a secondary market sale. We then go on to the investing firms' level to discuss the risk-budgeting process. Risk-budgeting is an alternative to asset allocation; the focus is on risk rather than expected return weighting.  
