---
title: Class Slides 2 Discussion of Loan Covenants Vs. Bond Covenants
aliases: [Class Slides 2 Discussion of Loan Covenants Vs Bond Covenants]
linter-yaml-title-alias: Class Slides 2 Discussion of Loan Covenants Vs Bond Covenants
---

# Class Slides 2 Discussion of Loan Covenants Vs. Bond Covenants

# Class Discussion Problem for Class 2

## Bond Covenants (bonds issued to the public) versus Loan Covenants (loans that are private placements)

First read the class note on bond contracts on the Canvas website. It has a summary of the MGM bond prospectus,  which is also available in full on Canvas if you are interested. Then read the Wellman loan covenants which are on Canvas. For a class discussion (similar to a case that is not turned in) we will discuss the differing role of covenants in bonds,  exemplified by the MGM Mirage bonds,  and the covenants in loans,  exemplified by the Wellman covenants. We begin our discussion by looking at the number and type of covenants and the differing role of a covenant default on a loan versus a bond. Read the Wellman covenants and the summary of the MGM bond that outlines the covenants. In the Wellman 1999 covenants there are EBITDA and leverage ratio covenants that might actually be violated even if the borrower is current on debt payments. The Wellman 2003 loan agreement occurred after a previous covenant violation. The covenants in this agreement are even stricter and limit actions that a business might need to undertake in the normal course of business,  such as capital expenditures and acquisitions. Be prepared to discuss the following questions:

1. Why are there more covenants in the loan than the bond? Why do the loans have covenants that are more likely to be violated? Consider both differences in the situations of the borrowers and the fundamental difference between loans and bonds.
1. Why are there more restrictions in the 2003 Wellman loans than the 1999 loans? 3. On the next page there is the section on default from a 1999 loan agreement. It has more contingencies defining default than the MGM bond and does not have the bond's requirement that a trustee wishes to declare a default if there are violations of non-financial covenants or any requirement that at least 25% of loan holders want to declare a default in that circumstance. Why is the loan's definition of a default so different from that in the bond? 4. How do the loan contracts allow the lenders to exercise control over the borrower?

Here is the section on default from a 1999 loan agreement. SECTION VI. DEFAULT
 **6.1 Events of Default.** The occurrence of any one or more of the following events shall constitute an Event of Default under this Agreement:

- (A) Payments. Borrower shall fail to pay
	- (i) any amount of principal of the Loans when due,  or
	- (ii) interest on the Loans when due,  or
	- (iii) any fee or other amount payable hereunder or under any of the other Loan Documents within three (3) Business Days after the same shall become due.
- (B) Representations and Warranties. Any representation or warranty by Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries under or in connection with this Agreement or the other Loan Documents shall prove to have been incorrect in any material respect when made or deemed made.
- (C) Failure by Borrower to Perform Covenants. Borrower shall fail in any material respect to perform or observe any term,  covenant or agreement contained in this Agreement or any other Loan Document on its part to be performed or observed.
- (D) Bankruptcy. Borrower or any Subsidiary shall admit in writing its inability to,  or shall fail generally or be generally unable to,  pay its debts (including its payrolls) as such debts become due,  or shall make a general assignment for the benefit of creditors; or Borrower or any Subsidiar y shall file a voluntary petition in bankruptcy or a petition or answer seeking reorganization,  to effect a plan or other arrangement with creditors or any other relief under the Bankruptcy Code or under any other state or federal law relating to bankruptcy or reorganization granting relief to debtors,  whether now or hereafter in effect,  or shall file an answer admitting the jurisdiction of the court and the material allegations of any involuntary petition filed against Borrower or any Subsidiary pursuant to the Bankruptcy Code or any such other state or federal law; or Borrower or any Subsidiary shall be adjudicated a bankrupt,  or shall make an assignment for the benefit of creditors,  or shall apply for or consent to the appointment of any custodian,  receiver or trustee for all or any substantial part of Borrower's or such Subsidiary's property,  or shall take any action to authorize any of the actions set forth above in this subsection; or an involuntary petition seeking any of the relief specified in this subsection shall be filed against Borrower or any Subsidiary and shall not be dismissed within 30 days; or any order for relief shall be entered against Borrower or any Subsidiary in any involuntary proceeding under the Bankruptcy Code or any such other state or federal law.
 - (E) Default Under Other Indebtedness. Borrower or any Subsidiary shall
	 	- (1) fail to make any payment of any principal of,  or interest or premium on,  any Indebtedness when due (whether by scheduled maturity,  required prepayment,  acceleration,  demand or otherwise) and such failure shall continue after the applicable grace period,  if any,  specified in the agreement or instrument relating to such Indebtedness; or
	 	- (2) fail to perform or observe any term,  covenant or condition on its part to be performed or observed under any agreement or instrument relating to any such Indebtedness,  when required to be performed or observed,  and such failure shall continue after the applicable grace period,  if any,  specified in such agreement or instrument,  if the effect of such failure to perform or observe is to accelerate,  or to permit the acceleration of,  the maturity of such Indebtedness; or any such Indebtedness shall be declared to be due and payable,  or required to be prepaid (other than by a regularly scheduled required prepayment),  prior to the stated maturity thereof.
- (F) Material Adverse Change. A material adverse change in the business,  results of operations or condition (financial or otherwise) of Borrower shall have occurred which gives reasonable grounds to conclude,  in the reasonable judgment of the Bank,  that Borrower may not,  or will be unable to,  perform or observe in the normal course of its obligations under the Loan Documents.
- (G) Invalidity of Loan Documents. Any of the Loan Documents,  after delivery thereof,  shall for any reason be revoked or invalidated,  or otherwise cease to be in full force and effect,  or Borrower,  any Subsidiary or any other Person shall contest in any manner the validity or enforceability thereof,  or Borrower,  any Subsidiary or any other Person shall deny that it has any further liability or obligation thereunder.

 **6.2 Effect of Event of Default.** If any Event of Default shall occur,  the Bank may,  without limitation,
- (A) cease making disbursements of the Loan proceeds,
- (B) declare the entire unpaid principal amount of the Loans and the Notes,  all interest accrued and unpaid thereon and all other amounts payable under or in connection with this Agreement and the other Loan Documents to be forthwith due and payable,  whereupon the Loans and the Notes,  all such accrued interest and all such other amounts shall become and be forthwith due and payable,  without presentment,  demand,  protest or further notice of any kind,  all of which are hereby expressly waived by Borrower,
- (C) exercise any or all of the Bank's rights and remedies under the Loan Documents,  and
- (D) proceed to enforce all other rights and remedies available to the Bank under applicable law. All of the Bank's rights and remedies hereunder are cumulative and not exclusive.